 

\rcntetay Parasitology

Reference Manual
Fifth Edition

 

 

   

4 San
y)
PS
i Ss
NY 4
Ne . eas
es: i ‘

William J. Foreyt

 
Veterinary Parasitology

 

Reference Manual
Fifth Edition
Veterinary Parasitology

 

Reference Manual
Fifth Edition

William J. Foreyt

( Blackwell
O Publishing
William J. Forest, 0h.D.. 1s a professer 1 die College of
Verermary Med at Washington Sooo University and teaches

  

veterinary parasittests. diseases ot ihte, and diagnostic para-

Grolawsy, Hiv mayor sscareh anterests 08 parasitic and infectious

disc ses of wikd and domestic anne s!-. with an emphasis on dis-

 

eas intentetion between wild wid danestic animals.

1997, 1994, 1990, LY8Y William J. Forest
4) 2001 Towa State University Press
Ml rights reserved

Blackwell Publishing, Professional
2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa SOOL4

 

Orders: 1-800-862-6657
Office: 1-515-292-0140
Fax: 1-515-292-3348

 

Web site: www. blackwellprofessional.com

Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use,
or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is granted by
Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee of $.10 per copy
is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations
ense by CCC, a separate

 

that have been granted a photocopy li

 

system of payments has been arranged. The fee code for users of
the ‘Transactional Reporting Service is 0-8 138-24 19-2/2001 S.10.

Printed on acid-free paper in the United States of America

First edition, 1989 © William J. Foreyt

Second edition, 1990 © William J. Foreyt
Third edition, 1994 © William J. Fore
Fourth edition, 1997 © William J. Foreyt

Vitth edition, 2001 © lowa State University Press.

 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Foreyt, William J.

Veterinary parasitology reference manual / William J. Foreyt.
— Sthed.

pcm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 0-8138-2419-2 (alk. paper)

1. Veterinary parasitology—Handbooks, manuals, ete.

IDNIM: 1. Parasitic Diseases, Animal—Handbooks. 2.
Parasites—Handbooks.| I. Title.
SES10.A3 F67 2001
636.089°696—de2 | 2001004464

Lhe last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6 5

Disclaimer

‘The nature of drug information is constantly
evolving because of ongoing research hi

and clinieai
experience. While care has been tal

ken to ensure
the accuracy of the information presented.

| errors
may have been mi

sed. Readers are advised that
decisions regarding drug use must be based on
the independent judgment of the clinician, new

 

information about the drug, and changing med.
ical practices, Package inserts and labels for each
drug product should be read carefully for
dosage, route of administration, and withdrawal
period. The author and publisher cannot be held
responsible for any damage resulting from re-
liance on any information contained herein,
whether with respect to drug identification, uses,
procedures, dosages, or equivalencies, or by rea-
son of any misstatement or error, negligent or
otherwise, contained in this work.
CONTENTS

Preface
Introduction

Section 1. Diagnostic Parasitology

Collection and Submission of Samples
Diagnostic Techniques

Microscopy

Bibliography

Section 2. General Parasitology

Classification Simplified
Biblography

Section 3. Parasites of Dogs

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts
Location of Major Parasites
Zoonotic Diseases

Drugs

Internal Parasites

External Parasites
Biblography

Section 4. Parasites of Cats

Miscellaneous Parasites

Miscellaneous External Parasites
of Cats and Dogs

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts

Location of Major Parasites

Zoonotic Diseases

Drugs

Internal Parasites

External Parasites

Bibliography

Section §. Parasites of Cattle, Sheep,
and Goats

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts in Cattle
Coccidia in Cattle
Location of Major Parasites in Cattle
Zoonotic Diseases in Cattle
Fecal Eggs and Oocysts in

Sheep and Goats

vii
viii

we Ww

Re}

69

69
69

70

71

Coccidia in Sheep and Goats

Location of Major Parasites in
Sheep and Goats

Zoonotic Diseases in Sheep and
Goats

Drugs Used in Ruminants

Internal Parasites

External Parasites

Bibliography

Section 6. Parasites of Llamas

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts
Coccidia in Llamas
Location of Major Parasites
Drugs

Internal Parasites

External Parasites
Bibliography

Section 7, Parasites of Horses

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts
Location of Major Parasites
Zoonotic Diseases

Drugs

Internal Parasites

External Parasites
Bibliography

Section 8. Parasites of Pigs

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts
Location of Major Parasites
Zoonotic Diseases

Drugs

Internal Parasites

External Parasites
Bibliography

Section 9, Parasites of Birds

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts
Location of Major Parasites
Zoonotic Diseases
Coccidia in Birds

Drugs

Internal Parasites

 

Ilo
116
117
119
120
External Parasites
Bibliography

Section 10. Parasites of Ratites
(Ostriches, Emus, and Cassowaries)

Location of Major Parasites
Drugs

Common Parasites
Bibliography

Section 11. Parasites of Laboratory
Animals

Drugs
Common Parasites
Bibliography

Section 12. Parasites of Wildlife

Important Parasites of Wildlife
Parasites
Bibliography

Section 13. Parasites of Marine Mammals

Marine Mammals
Major Parasites
Drugs

Internal Parasites
Bibliography

163
166

167

167
167
168
170

171

171
W71
179

181

181
184
197

199

199
200
201
201
206

Vi

Section 14. Parasites of Reptiles

Common Reptiles

  

Major Parasites
Fecal Eggs and Oocysts
Drugs

Internal Parasites
Bibliography

Section 15. Parasites of Humans

Location of Major Parasites
Common Parasites

Internal Parasites

External Parasites
Bibliography

Section 16. Common Artifacts in Feces

Artifacts
Spurious Parasites

Section 17. Tables

Metric / English conversion factors
and measures of concentration

Temperature, length, and volume
conversion chart

Abbreviations Used in Text

Index

207

207
208
209
211
212
212

213

213
214
215
216
217

219 ©

219
220

223

224

224

225
PREFACE

In this revised fifth edition, many references
and figures have been updated and improved,
newer drugs have been included, the section on
parasites of marine mammals has been improved,
and sections on laboratory animal parasites and
human parasites have been added.

This book evolved as a response to the needs
of veteri inary students, and techni-

 

narians, vetel

    

cians and provides access to pragmatic reference
information in veterinary parasitology. I

 

the book by host species, dogs, cats, ruminants,
horses, pigs, avian, reptiles, wildlife, marine mam-
mals, laboratory animals, and humans to allow
easy access to information on parasite life c
importance, location in host, zoonotic potential,
pertinent literature, diagnosis, and treatment. |
have simplified the taxonomy of parasites for vet-
erinary use by modifying the most easily under-
stood taxonomic systems. Photographs of the im-
portant diagnostic stages are included to assist in

ycles,

 

the diagnosis of parasitic disease. While this book
is not a complete parasitology reference encyclo-
pedia, it meets the challenge of providing a com-
posite reference in everyday, routine veterinary
parasitology.

Many people have assisted with this publica-
tion and my thanks are extended to them. I espe-
cially thank the late Dr. Richard Wescott, Dr.
Charles Leathers, Richard Dixon, Kris Foreyt, Dr.
Lora Rickard, Dr. Ann Lichtenwalner, Dr. Bill

Pedersen, Dr. Allan Pessier, Dan Rice, John

vii

Lagerquist, Dr. Mark Winning, Ann Foreyt, the
Biomedical Communications Unit at Washington
State University, Amy Wood, Dr. Murray Dailey,
and Susan Barnard, who contributed to several

 

important aspects of the book.

The Washington Department of Fish and
Wildlife, Oregon Department of Fish and
Wildlife, and the Idaho Department of Game
have cooperated with me in my research projects
and supplied me with thousands of wildlife sam-
ples over the years. | thank them for their enthu-
siastic support. Richard Dixon and Kristine
Foreyt drew a majority of the illustrations, which
significantly enhance the usefulness of this publi-

 

cation. Their artwork is greatly appreciated. Dr,
Lora Rickard contributed significantly to the sec-

y Dailey

 

tion on parasites of llamas. Dr. Murr

 

contributed significantly to the section on marine
mammals. Susan Barnard of the Atlanta Zoo con-

tributed significantly

   

to the section on reptiles.
Financial support for the first edition of this pub-
lication in 1984 from The Merck Company
Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.

five exciting

  

This book is dedicated to my
kids, Ann, Russell, Jane, Emily, and Kara, who
are allowing me to live my second childhood
through their interest in small wiggling creatures.
It is equally dedicated to veterinary students to
develop their biological interests and skills in the
fascinating arenas of veterinary parasitology and
field biology. | hope this book is useful to you.

 

Bill Foreyt
INTRODUCTION

Parasites are a fascinating group of inverte-
brates that are found in and on all groups of ani-
mals of interest in veterinary medicine. ‘They have

evolved and developed with many of their hosts and

 

may or may not produce clinical disease, depending
ona variety of environmental, ecologi
logical, physiological, and managerial factors that
influence the host parasite relationship. This rela-
tionship is constantly changing, and as producers
change management systems through animal breed-

 

al, immuno-

 

ing, animal manipulation, exotic introductions, en-
vironmental control, and use of drugs, different
manifestations of disease are observed. As an exam-
ple, Fascioloides magna is a liver fluke of white-
tailed deer and elk and usually does not harm these
hosts. However, when domestic sheep or goats are
grazed in areas where E magna is present, death of
sheep and goats occurs within a relativel
time. Some hosts cannot tolerate the effects of spe-
cific parasites and die, whereas other hosts are well
adapted to the parasite and no clinical signs of dis-
ease are present.

short

 

 

  

amples of some of the ways parasites affect
hosts are:

1. The worry and scare factor. Adult bot flies

 

  

ify animals.
Lrritation. Lice cause intense irritation and
self-mutilation.

do not harm directly, but ter

NV

 

3. Transmission of diseases. Biting flies and
ticks transmit a variety of diseases.
Ingestion of blood and lymph. An abo-
masal nematode, Haemonchus contortus,

viii

-auses severe anemia.

 

Sceretion of toxins. Bot fly lary:

 

" ae secrete
toxins and may cause death,

 

Mechanical blockage. Massive ascarid i

 

fections may occlude the intestine.
71
destroy entire kidneys.

sue damage. Kidney worms in dogs

 

 

Production of traumatic lesions. Larvae
of Habronema sp. produce “summer
sores” in horses.

Psychosomatic disease. Animals are rest-
less when external parasites are prevalent.
Disruption of metabolic function. Type IL
Ostertagia ostertagia increases abomasal
pH.

Competition for nutrients. Many para-
sites cause reduced weight gains and feed
utilization.

 

Zoonotic infections. Certa

  

n parasites
transfer from animals to humans.

   

nce many parasites can be pathogenic, the
goal of the clinician and producer is prevention of
clinical parasitism through management, nutri-
tion, epizootiology, and effective drugs.

 

 

  

Knowledge of life cycles and epizootiology must
be used in the formulation of effective parasite
control programs. Indiscriminate use of drugs is a
poor substitute for suboptimal management.

A final word is that new parasites and ecolog-
ical relationships are being discovered, so do not
be surprised when you make a discovery contrar
to published reports.

 
Veterinary Parasitology

 

 

Reference Manual
Fifth Edition
Section 1

DIAGNOSTIC
PARASITOLOGY

Collection and Submission of Samples

Diagnosis of parasitic infections depends on several
factors, such as collection of the sample, transport of the
sample to the laboratory, and method of laboratory
evaluation. Diagnostic stages of most parasites can be
detected in feces, blood, sputum, or skin scrapings.
However, infections of immature parasites and latent
and occult infections present a diagnostic challenge.
Important factors to be considered in the diagnosis of
parasitism and the interpretation of results are:

. Age of the host,

Previous exposure to parasites (resistance),
Time of the year (spring rise),

Physiological relationship (pariparturient rise),

. Geographical location,
6. Previous use of anthelmintics,

1
2
3
4
5
7. History of clinical disease, and
8. Other considerations.

Proper collection and submission of samples to the

laboratory increase the accurate diagnosis of parasitic
infection.

Fecal Samples

Feces must be fresh for accurate results. As feces
age, a diagnosis is complicated because many parasite
eggs develop and hatch into larvae. Contaminants such
as free-living soil nematodes, fly larvae, mites, and other
arthropods often invade feces and complicate a diagno-

 

At least 10 g of fresh feces should be collected. If
samples are more than two hours old, samples should be
stored at 4°C until examined. Many parasite stages can
be stored at 4°C for at least two months with minimal
development. For routine shipment to the laboratory,
samples can be cooled to 4°C and then packed with ice
or other coolant (blue ice) for shipment via any of the
24- t 48-hour transport services. Feeal samples are best
stored and sent in whirl-pak bags, small plastic sandwich
bags, plastic containers, disposable laboratory gloves
turned inside out, or rectal palpation gloves turned in-
side out, All samples should be clearly labeled with a
black indelible marker with the number of the animal,
date, and the person responsible for the sample.

If coolants are not available, samples can be stored
indefinitely in L0% formalin (one part feces, nine parts
10% formalin), but limitations must be noted (Fig. 1).
Approximately 50% of the ruminant strongyle eggs
were detected in feces stored in 10% formalin for 200
days. Storage by freezing is very inefficient, and storage
in 70% ethyl alcohol or 100% methyl alcohol is unac-
ceptable (Fig. 2.

 

When Giardia sp. is suspected, feces can be placed
in polyvinyl alcohol fixative at a ratio of one part feces
to two parts polyvinyl alcohol or in 5% formalin for fix-
ation and transport. Also, fecal smears on slides can be
stained with Gormori’s trichrome, iron-hematoxylin,
clorzol black, or Giemsa stains and submitted to the
laboratory in standard slide mailers.

+ 10% Formalin
©---0 5% Formalin

0-0 2.5% Formalin
100% Methyl alcohol
70% Ethyl alcohol

100
90
80

 
   
   
 

 

D
2
oS
$
8
3
2
o
&
8
© 50
6
o
&
s
=
G
°
o
a

13571015 20 30 40 5075100150200

Days preserved

fect of formalin and alcohol preservation on
mean recovery of strongyle eggs over time. Vertical lines
indicate 1 SD. From Foreyt W.J.: Recovery of nematode
cays and larvae in deer: Evaluation of fecal preservation
methods. J Am Ver Med Assn 189:1065-1067, 1986.
Reprinted with permission.

 

Percentage of eggs recovered

 

Days preserved

Fig. 2. Effect of temperature on the mean recovery of
strongyle eggs from deer feces over time. From Foreyt
WJ: Recovery of nematode eggs and larvae in deer:
valuation of fecal preservation methods. | Avi Vet Med

 

 

 

Assn 189:1065-1067, 1986. Reprinted with permission.
Section 1

Fecal Flotation

For normal stools, the usual diagnostic test is the fe-

cal flotation test. This test concentrates eggs and oocysts

 

present in the feces into a drop of solution for easy iden-

 

tification and enumeration of parasitic stages. Important

 

comparative factors in the fecal flotation technique are

 

the specific gravity of the flotation solution, the viscosi-
ty or type of solution used, and the rate of plasmolysis
caused by the solution. A specific gravity that is too low
will not float many stages, whereas a solution with a spe-
cific gravity that is too high will cause plasmolysis, os-
mosis, or rupture of the stages, making diagnosis diffi-
cult (Fig. 3). Also, as the specific gravity is increased,

 

e ive debris also floats, which decreases the cfficien-

   

cy of the test. Most parasitic stages float efficiently at a
specific gravity of 1.2 to 1.3. My laboratory uses sugar
solution (specific gravity = 1.27). Sugar has a distinct ad-
vantage over salt solution in that less plasmolysis and

 

distortion occur in the eggs and oocysts. Fecal-flotation

 

slide preparations from sugar solution can be kept at
4°C for at least 24 hours, and often for several v
2s.
slides can be used as next-day reference and teachin:

months, with a minimum of distortion of ¢:

 

 

slides. Disadvantages of sugar solutions are that sugar

can be messy and sticky, and sugar attracts flies and oth-

 

 

er arthropods. When salt solutions are used, egg distor-
tion usually occurs in a few hours, and the slides have a
ly. To in
the shelf life of a fecal-flotation slide, one can put

 

tendency to crystallize and dry out very quic

creas|

 

fingernail polish or quick-drying glue around the cover-

 

 

slip. Freezing the prepared slide is often effective for pre-
serving the material for many months or years. One ad-
ditional advantage of sugar solution is that some
fluke,

abmincola, float better in sugar than salt

parasite eggs, such as the salmon poisonin

 

  

Nanophyetus
solutions. In salt solutions, the eggs often do not float
and are often missed during examination.

Blood

Blood is used for the diagnosis of specific parasitic

 

stages found in the circulatory system. These parasites
generally include blood protozoa such as Babesia spp.
Leucocytozoon spp., and immature stages of filarial par-
asites, such as microfilariae of Dirofilaria imnitis

 

Whole blood can be collected in tubes containing anti-
TA),

and sent to the laboratory at 4°C or in a chilled con-

  

coagulant, such as ethylenediaminetetraacerate (E

tainer.

 

For most blood parasites, blood smears on standard

 

 

microscope slides can be made from fresh blood or
blood with anticoagulant. After air drying, smears are
routinely stained with Giemsa stain or Wright's stain.

Stained or unstained slides can be sent to the laboratory.

 

 

  

Ideal Too High

3. Effect of specific gravity: on egg flotation.

   

 

Skin Scrapings

When mites are suspected, skin scrapings can be
collected and forwarded to the laboratory by placing

 

them in glycerin in a tightly sealed vial for shipment.
Vials should be packed carefully to prevent breakage or

leakage.

Internal Parasites

Most internal parasites can be preserved in 10%
formalin or glycerin for shipment. Specimens should be
placed in leak-proof vials and packed carefully in sturdy
containers to prevent breakage.

External Parasites

Arthropod parasites can be most effectively stored
in 70% ethyl alcohol or glycerin for shipment or lon

 

 

term preservation. Formalin (10%) will also preserve
arthropods. Leak-proof vials and a sturdy shipping con

tainer are needed for safe transport.

Labeling

All specimens must be clearly labeled with animal
species, location in host, date of collection, place calleet-
ed, and collector's name, address, and telephone number

 
 

 

Diagnostic Parasitology
Diagnostic Techniques
Table 1. Modified double centrifugation technique
1. Mix 1g of feces in 10-12 ml water in a beaker and stir until feces are in suspension.

Pour the mixture through a tea strainer into another beaker. Press the material in the strainer with a spatula
and discard the material in the strainer.

3. Pour the contents into a 15-ml centrifuge tube and fill to the top with water.

4. Centrifuge the tubes at 1,500 rpm for 5-10 minutes.

3. Decant the tube and then fill one half full of flotation solution. Stir the sediment with a wooden applicator
stick and then fill the tube almost to the top with flotation solution.

6. Place the tube in the centrifuge and with a dropper add flotation solution to the tube so the solution is about
level with the top of the tube. Place a 22-mm? coverslip on top of the tube and in contact with the sugar so-
lution.

7. Centrifuge at 1,500 rpm for 5-10 minutes. The coverslip will not fall off if the centrifuge has free-swinging

trunions that swing out to the horizontal position.

Remove coverslip by lifting straight upward, and place ona glass slide. All parasite stages that floated should
be in the drop under the coverslip.

amine the slide under x 100 (x10 ocular and x10 objective) or higher magnification and observe all para-
site stages present.

 

Note: The centrifuge must have free-swinging buckets. If the centrifuge has a fixed bucket position, the coverslips will
fall off. Fecal flotations can also be done without centrifugation by allowing samples in step 4 to set for 20 minutes and in
step 7 to set for 30 minutes. This method is not as effective as centrifugation, but results are usually reliable.

Table 2, Common flotation solutions for the fecal flotation technique

Sugar: Granulated sugar (sucrose) 454. or 10 pounds
Tap water 355 ml 3550 ml
(specitic gravity = 1.27)

Dissolve sugar in hot tap water directly, or add sugar to hot water over a low heat and stir.
Approximately 2 ml of 37% formaldehyde or phenol crystals can be added to deter growth of mold.

Sodium chloride: Saturated NaCl or NaCl 400 g
Tap water 1,000 ml
(specific gravity = 1.18-1.2)

  

Magnesium sulfate: MgSO, 4008
1,000 ml

(specific gravity =

Zine sulfate: Zine sulfate 371g
lap water 1,000 ml
(specific gravity = 1.18)

Sodium nitrate: Sodium nitrate 400 g
lap water 1,000 mi

(specific gravity = 1.18)
Section 1

Table 3. Ether-formalin sedimentation technique

 

 

 

IL. Mix 1 g of feces in 15 ml of water, strain the mixture, and pour into a 15-ml centrifuge tube
2. Centrifuge at 1,000 rpm for 1-2 minutes
3. Decant supernatant, add fresh water, and centrifuge again for 1-2 minutes.
4. Decant, add 10 ml of 10% formalin, and let stand for 10 minutes.
5. Add 3 ml of ether, apply a stopper, and shake the contents vigorously. Centrifuge the mixture .
dd 3 5 apply pper, and ¢ iB y- Centrifuge the mixture for 2 minutes,
6. Remove the debris on top of the tube with a cotton-tipped swab. Decant the rest of the fluid.
7. Collect the sediment with a pipette, place it on a microscope slide, and examine it microscopically for para-
site eggs.
Note: This technique is good for detection of trematode eges.

Table 4.

Fecal

edimentation technique for Fasciola hepatica and some other fluke eggs

 

Mix 5 g feces in 200 ml water in a beaker.
Pour the mixture through a tea strainer and discard the material in the strainer.

After 10 minutes, decant approximately 70% of the supernatant and refill the beaker with fresh water.
Repeat step 3 for three to five times until the supernatant is clear,

Pour off 90% of the supernatant and pour the sediment into a Petri dish.

 

amine the sediment under a dissecting microscope (x20-*30) or scanning objective (x4) of the microscope
ciola hepatica.

 

(total magnifications = x40) for large, yellow, operculated eggs of Fa:

 

Note: A commercial device consisting of two sieves is sold under the trade name Flukefinder and is

available from Visual Differences, 106 North Bear Bluff Road, Preston, ID $3263 (erww.fluke

Table $.

ak

Table 6.

This is a dilution method of estimating eggs present in fecal samples.

 

@ mac.com).

Baermann technique for lingworm larvae isolation

Place warm water (approximately 25°C) into a glass funnel that has a stopcock or clamp ona rubber hose
on the end of the funnel.

Take 5 g (or more) feces, wrap the feces in two layers of gauze and place the Feces in the water in the funnel.
After § hours, withdraw the bottom 10-15 ml of fluid from the funnels into a 15-ml centrifuge tube.
Centrifuge the tube for 5 minutes at 1,500 rpm.

With a pipette, withdraw the bottom 2-3 drops from the centrifuge tube and transfer to microscope slide.
Add a coverslip and look for larvae under the microscope.

Modified McMaster technique for parasite eggs

 

 

 

 

 

1. Mix 3.g feces in 15 ml of water and pour through a tea strainer.
2. Pour strained material into a 15-ml centrifuge tube and centrifuge at 1,500 rpm for 2 minutes

3. Mix the sediment in 10 ml of flotation solution and pour into a beaker; add additional 32 ml of flotation so-

lution.

4. With a pipette, rransfer suspension to a McMaster counting chamber and fill both chambers.

5. Transfer the slide to a microscope and count all eggs inside the ruled squares.

6. Multiply the number of eggs in both chambers by 50 for the total number of eggs per gram of fec
Note: This technique is not very accurate for samples with small numbers of eggs. McMaster Slides are available from

Advanced Equine Products, 5004 228th Ave. S

 

F, Issaquah, WA 98029, 425-391-1169, (twriv.advancedequine.com!

 

veterinary).

 
Diagnostic Parasitology

Table 7. Direct smear

 

This technique is used primarily for diagnosis of Giardia. It is a very inefficient technique for diagnosis of other parasite
infections.

  

lL. Mix a fecal sample the size of the head of a match (I-2 mm) with a drop of water or saline on a microscope
slide.

2. Mix the drop with a circular motion until the specimen is approximately | x 1 cm.

3. Add a coverslip and examine under the microscope.

4. If large particles are present under the coverslip, remove the particles or start with a new sample.

 

Table 8. Skin scraping for external parasites

This technique is used primarily for the diagnosis of mites.
lL. Add several drops of mineral oil or glycerin to the area to be scraped. The area should be at the periphery of
the cutaneous lesion, not in the center of the lesion.

 

2. With a scalpel blade, scrape the area to a depth that blood begins to ooze from the wound.

3. Transfer the bloody material that was scraped to a microscope slide.

4. Add additional mineral oil and cover with a coverslip.

5. <amine under low power (x40) of the microscope first, and if nothing is seen, increase the magnification.

 

Note: Large amounts of hair or skin can be digested in 10% KOH for 12-24 hours, and the sediment can
be examined for mites either directly after centrifuging, or the sediment can be mixed with the sugar

flotation solution.

 

Table 9. Evaluation of blood for micro filariae

 

 

Knott’s test:
L. Mix | ml of blood with 9 ml of 2% formalin ina [5-ml tube. Mix
covering the top of the tube with your thumb.

by inverting the tube several times after

 

 

2. Wait 2-3 minutes and centrifuge the tube for 5 minutes at 1,500 rpm.

3. Use a pipette to draw off | or 2 drops of sediment from the base of the tube and transfer to a microscope
slide.

4. Add a coverslip and examine at x400.

 

A drop of 0.1% methylene blue added to the drop on the microscope slide can be helpful in making the di-

agnosis.

Hematocrit method:

 

I, Fill a microhematocrit tube with blood and centrifuge for 1 minute.
Wait afew minutes and then examine the buffy coat with a dissecting microscope. Look for live microfilari-
ac.

3. Break the tube at the buffy coat and dab the buffy coat ona microslide. Add coverslip and examine for mi-

crofilariae on low power on the microscope.

Direct blood smear:
Place | drop of fresh blood or heparinized blood on a microslide and cover with a coverslip.

Examine under low power for live microfilariae.

wre

. To slow the microfilariae, place a drop of 10% formalin at the edge of the coverslip.
Section |

Microscopy

Table 10. Calibration of the microscope

The accurate measurement of microscopic diagnostic stages of parasites requires the calibration of the

microscope.
Two scales are necessary: the ocular micrometer in the ocular of the microscope, which is a glass disc bearing

an arbitrary

scale of 50 or 100 divisions, and the stage micrometer, which is a commercial slide etched with an absolute scale 1 or 2

mm long, subdivided into units of 0.1 mm and 0.01 mm.

Most microscopic objects are measured in microns (jim) or (Em). Therefore, these units of measurement are important:

Imm = 1,000 yum
0.1 mm = 100 wm
0.01 mm = 10 jun

Most parasite diagnostic stages are between 10 yum and 100 jum long

 

The number of magnifications is determined by multiplying the ocular power (usually x10) by the objective power,
Therefore, a x10 ocular with x4 objective is x40.

On the lowest power of the microscope (usually a x4 objective), superimpose the ocular micrometer over the stage mi-
crometer: Line up the left-hand ends of the scales. Find a place on the scales where one line on each scale coincides direct-

 

over the others and count the number of ocular units with a known metric unit on the stage micrometer,

 

:xample: 58 units of the ocular micrometer coincides with 0.36 mm on the stage micrometer,

One space of the ocular micrometer, therefore, equals 0.36 mm divided by 58 units = 0.0062 mm per ocular unit or 6.2
tim per ocular unit, When a parasite egg is measured and is 12 ocular units long, multiply the conversion factor (6.2) by
12 ocular units to obtain the length of the egg (74-4 jum).

Using the same technique, calibrate all objectives on the microscope and record the conversion factors on the micro-

 

scope. Most microscopes with x10 eyepieces will have conversion factors similar to these:
x4 objective = 25.0 yun per unit space
x10 objective = 9.0 jum per unit space

 

x40 objective = 2.5 1m per unit space

x100 objective = 1.0 jum per unit space

 

 

 

 

 

rr) 80
\

an cn

 

 

in

; i

 

    

Microscope Ocular

 

Fig. 5. Example of calibration of the ocular micrometer
4. Example of a stage micrometer and an ocular mi- with the x4 objectiv

   

and 10 ocular. Not
crometer in the eyepiece 0.76 mm = 760 ttm; I space = 16.9 wm

 

45 spaces

 

 
 

Fig. 6. Example of calibration of the ocular micrometer
with the 100 (oil emersion) objective and x10 ocular.
Note: 73 spaces = 0.07 mm = 70 jim; I space = 1.04 wm.

Bibliography

     

Adam KMG,
Protozoology. London, Churchill Livingstone, 1971.

aman PJV: Medical and Veterinary

Arundel JH: Field procedures for counting gastrointestinal
597,

 

worms in sheep and cattle. Aust Ver J 43:
1967.

Beane RD, Hobbs N‘I: The Baermann technique for esti-
mating Protostrongylus infection in bighorn sheep:
Effect of laboratory procedures. | Wild Dis 19:7-9,
1983.

Bowman DD: Georgis’ Parasitology for Veterinarians. 7th
edititon. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Go.. 1999.

Brunner CJ, Hendrix CM, Blagburn BL, et al:
Comparison of serologic tests for detection of antigen
in canine heartworm infections. J Ant Vet Med Assoc
192:1423~1427, 1988

Calpin JP, Prestwood AK: Diagnosis of protozoan infec
tions. In Greene CE (ed): Clinical Microbiology and
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat. Philadelphia,
W.B. Saunders Co., 1984, pp. 137-143.

Christie N, Jackson F: Specific identification of strongyle
cygs in small samples of sheep feces. Res Vet Sci,

32:1 134117, 1982.

David ED, Lindquist W
ty of certain helminth eggs using sucrose gradient cen-

2916-919, 1982.

 

 

Determination of specific gravi-

 

 

tifugation. | Parasitol 6

Diagnostic Parasitology

Foreyt WJ: Diagnostic Parasitology. In Parry BW (ed): The
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Clinical
Pathology, Part II. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co,
1989, pp. 979-1000.

Foreyt WJ: Recovery of nematode eggs and larvae in deer:
Evaluation of fecal preservation methods. | Am Vet
Med Assoc 9:1065-1067, 1986.

Garcia LS, Ash LR: Diagnostic Parasitology Clinical
Laboratory Manual. 2nd edition. St. Louis, CV Mosby,
1979.

Gibbs HC, Herd RP, Murrell KD (eds): The Veterinary
Clinics of North Americ
Parasites: Epidemiology and Control. Philadelphia,
W.B. Saunders Co., 1986.

Gordon H, McL, Whitlock HV: A new technique for
counting nematode eggs in sheep feces. Council Sci Ind
Res (Australia), 12:50-52, 1939.

Grieve RB (ed): The Veterinary Clinics of North America:
Small Animal Practice - Parasitic Infections.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1987.

Hangay G, Dingl
2. Plants, Invertebrates and Techniques. Academic
Press, New York, 1985.

Herd RP (ed): The Veterinary Clinics of North America:
Equine Practice ~ Parasitology. Philadelphia, W.B.
Saunders Co., 1986.

Hubert J, Kerboeuf D: A new method for culture of larvae
used in diagnosis of ruminant gastrointestinal strongy-

Food Animal Practice -

 

 

 

 

M: Biological Museum Methods. Vol.

losis: Comparison with fecal cultures. Can J Comp
Med, 48:63-71, 1984.

Jorgensen RJ: Isolation of infective Dictyocunlus larvae
from herbage. Vet Parasitol, 1:61-67, 1984.

Lappin MR, Calpin JP, Prestwood AK: Laboratory diagno-

 

sis of protozoal infections. In Green C.F. (ed): Infections
Diseases of the Dog and Cat. Philadelphia, W.B.
Saunders Co., 1990, pp. 751-762.

McKenna PB: The diagnostic value and interpretation of
fecal egg counts in sheep. N Z Ver J 29:129-132, 1981.

Melvin DM, Brooke MM: Laboratory Procedures for the
Diagnosis of Intestinal Parasites. U.S. Dept. of Health
and Human Services, Public Health Service, Atlanta,
Georgia, 1980.

Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. Manual of
Veterinary Parasitological Laboratory Techniques.
Technical Bulletin No. 18, London, Ebenezer Baylis and
Son, The Trinity Press, 1976.

Parry BV (ed): The Veterinary Clinics of North America:
Small Animal Practice—Clinical Pathology. Part 2.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1989.

Pritchard MII, Kruse GOW: The Collection and
Preservation of Animal Parasites. Lincoln, Nebraska,
University of Nebraska Press, 1982.

Reinecke RK: Identification of helminthes in ruminants at
neaopsy. J S Afr Vet Assoc 35:135-143, 1984.
Section 1

Roberts JL, Swan RA: Quantitative studies of ovine
haemonchosis 1. Relationship between fecal egg counts
and total worm counts. Vet Parasitol 8:165-171, 1981

an Veen TW: Methods for Diagnosis of

Parasitism in Small Ruminants. In Gibbs HC, Herd RP,

Murrell KD (eds): The Veterinary Clinics of North

America: Food Animal Practice ~ Parasites:

Schillhorn

   

Epidemiology and Control. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders
Co., 1986, pp. 335-344.

Sloss MW, Kemp RL, Zajak AM: Veterinary Clinical
Parasitology. 6th edititon. Ames, lowa, lowa State

 

10

University Press, 1994.

Traunt AL, Flliott SH, Kelly MT, et al: Comparison of
formalin-ethyl ether sedimentation, formalin-ethel ac-
etate sedimentation, and zine sulfate flotation tech.

 

    

niques for detection of intestinal parasites. J Ctin
Microbiol 13:882-884, 1981,

Whiteley HE: Your diagnostic protocol for Dirofilaria im-
mitis infection in dogs. Vet Med, 8:328-345, 1988.
Williams JF, Zajac A: Diagnosis of gastrointestinal para-
sitism in dogs and cats. Ralston Purina, St. Louis,

Missouri, 1980.
Section 2

GENERAL PARASITOLOGY

Classification Simplified

Table 11. Parasite classification simplified

 

Example: Ascaris sun, the swine roundworm
Kingdom — Animalia
Phylum — Nemathelmintes
Class - Nematoda
Subclass - Secernentea (Phasmida)
Order - Ascaridata
Superfamily ~ Ascaridoidea
Family - Ascarididae
Subfamily - Ascaridinac
Genus - Ascaris
Species — suum
Classification of Parasites of Veterinary Interest

 

 

Phylum: Sarcomastigophora (Protozoa), the single-celled animals
Subphylum: Sarcodina (Amocbas) E

   

ample:

utomoeba sp. in swine
Subphylum: — Mastigophora (Flagellata) Example:

Giardia canis in dogs,
Trichomonas sp. in birds
Subphylum: — Apicomplexa (Sporozoa) Example: Toxoplasma gondii in cats,

Eimeria spp. in ruminants
Ciliophora (Ciliata) Example: Balantidinm coli in swine

 

 

Phylum: Nemathelminthes, the roundworms.

Class: Nematoda

 

Superfamily: Ascaridoidea, the ascarids, very large worms in the intestine, direct life cycles
Famil

 

Ascaridae Example: Ascaris sur in swine
Heterakidae E:

 

xample: Heterakis gallinarum in poultry

Superfamily: Oxyuroidea, the pinworms, females have long pointed tails, direct life cycles

 

     

Family: Oxyuridae Example: Oxyuris equi in horses
Superfamily: Spiruroidea, the spiruroids, spiral tails in males, use intermediate hosts
Family Spiruridae Example: Habronema microstoma in horses
Thelaziidae Example: Thelazia lacrimalis in horses

Acuariidae Example: Physaloptera rara in dogs

Superfamily: Metastrongyloidea, the lungworms, small buccal capsule, usually have intermediate hosts

 

 

Family Metastrongylidae Example: Metastrongylus apri in swine
Protostrongylidae Example: Muellerins capillaris in goats
Crenosomatidac :xample: Crenosoma unlpis in dogs
Filaroididae Example: Aelurostrongylus abstrusus in cats

11
Section 2

Table [1, Parasite classification simplified (continued)

Superfamily: Trichostrongyloidea, small hairlike worms, “strongyles”, large bursa in males

 

Family: Trichostrongylidae Example:
Heligmonsomatidae
Amidostomatidae
Ollulanidae

Dictyocaulidae

 

Superfamily: Rhabditoidea, fre
Family: Strongyloididae Exampl

 

 

Haemonchus contortus in sheep
Nematospiroides dubius in mic
Amidostomum anseris in ducks
Ollulanus tricuspis in cats

 

Dictyocaulus viviparus in cattle

living cycles, very small worms, small buccal capsule

 

Strongyloides westeri in horse

Superiamily: Strongyloidea, large buccal capsule, cuticular appendages,

 

Family: Strongylidae ample:
Lrichonematidae :xample:
Ancylostomatidae Example:

Stephanuridae
Syngamidae

Superfamily: Filarioidea, the filarioids, long slender worms,

Family: Filariidac Example:

  

Setariidac

   

ample:

Onchocercidae Example:

 

 

Strongylus vulgaris. in horses
Oesophagostomum radiation in cattle
Ancylostoma caninum in dogs
Stephanurus dentatus in swine
Syngamus trachea in birds

have microfilariae in the blood

Parafilaria bovicola in cattle
Setaria equina in horses
Dirofilaria immitis in dogs

 

Phylum: Nemathelminthes, the roundworms.
Class: Nematoda (continued)

Superfamily: Dracunculoidea, rare in domestic animals

 

Family: Dracunculidae Example:

Dracunculus medinensis in dogs

Superfamily: Trichuroidea, long. narrow esophagus with stichisome cells

Family: Trichuridae
Trichinellidae

 

Trichuris suis in swine

‘Trichinella spiralis in swine

Superfamily: Dioctophymoidea, the large kidney worm. ‘These are rare in domestic animals.

  

Family: Dioctophymatidae campl

 

Dioctopbyme renale in dogs

 

Phylum: Acanthocephala - thorny-headed worm (Macracanthorhynchus sp. in swine)

 

 

Phylum: Platyhelminthes — flatworms
Class: Trematoda, flukes

Subclass: Monogenea, mostly on fish or amphibians and reptiles.

Subclass

 

Family: Fasciolidae ample:

     
 

Paramphistomatidae
idac

ample:

 

Dicrocoe
Opisthorchiidae
Hetcrophyidae
Troglotrematidae
Echinostomatidae
Strigeidac
Plagiorchidae

 

ample:

Schistosomatidae :xample:

12

Digenea, alternation of sexual and asexual generations, one oF more intermediate hosts

Fasciola hepatica in cattle
Paramphistomum cervi in cattle
Platynosoma fastosim in cats
Metorchis conjuctus in dogs
Cryptocotyle lingua in dogs
Paragonimus kellicotti in cats
Echinostoma revolutum in birds
Alaria canis in dogs
Prosthogonimus macrorchis in birds
Schistosoma nasali in horses
 

Table 11. Parasite classification simplitied (continued)

General Parasitology

 

Class: Cestoidea, tapeworms
Order: Pseudophyllidae, scolex unarmed, bothria present

E
F

 
 

<ample:
<ample:

 

Order: Cyclophyllidea, scolex with Four suckers

   

Family: Davaineidae, scole <ample:
armed, small intestine

of birds.

 

Anoplocephalidae, xample:
scolex unarmed
without rostellum

Mesocestoididac, Example:

scolex without

rostellum, median

genital pores

 

Dilepididae, rostellum <ample:
armed, two lateral
genital pores

Hymenolepididae, Example:

small intestine of birds,

mammals, and humans.

 

Taeniidae, scolex cample:
armed, genital pore

lateral

Diphyllobothriwn latum in dogs
Spirometra sp. in cats

Davainea sp. and Raillietina sp. in birds

Moniezia benedeni in cattle

Mesocestoides sp. in cats

Dipylidiun caninun in dogs

Hymenolepis sp. in rats

Echinococens granulosus in dogs

 

Phylum: Arthropoda
Class: Insecta, the insects

 

 

Order: Diptera — ties <ample:
Siphonaptera — fleas cample:
Mallophaga ~ biting lice <ample:
Anoplura — sucking lice <ample:
Class: Arachnida
Order: Arancida — spiders
Order: Acarina - mites and ticks.
Family Ixodidae - hard ticks Example:
Argasidae — soft ticks Example:

 

Dermanyssidae — mites <ample:

Sarcoptidae — mites sample:
Demodicidae = mites <ample:
<ample:

<ample:

Cheyletidae — mites

 

Psoroptidae — mites

13

Musca spp., Sipbona sp., on cattle
Ctenocephalides sp. on dogs

Bovicola spp. on cattle,

Trichodectes sp. on dogs

Haematopinus sp., Linognathus sp. on horses

Dermacentor sp., etc.
Otobius sp., etc.
Dermanyssus sp., etc.
Sarcoptes sp., etc.
Demodex sp., ete.
Cheyletiella sp., etc.
Psoroptes sp., ete.
Section 2

Bibliography

 

Anderson RC: Nematode Parasites of Vertebrates.
Cambridge, United Kingdom, University Press,
1992.

Anderson RC, Chabaud AG, Willmot $ (eds): CIH
Keys to the Nematode Parasites of Vertebrates.
Farnham Royal Bucks, England. Commonwealth
Agricultural Bureau.

No I. Anderson RC, Chabaud AG, Willmot S:
General Introduction, Glossary of Terms, Keys to
Subclasses, Orders and Superfamilies, 1974.

No 2. Hartwich G: Keys to Genera of the
Ascaricloidea, 1974.

No 3. Chabaud AG, Anderson RC, Bain O: Keys.
to the Order Spirurida (3 parts), 1975-1976.

No 4. Petter AJ, Quentin JC: Keys to Genera of

1976.

No 5. Anderson RC: Keys to Genera of the

Superfamily Metastrongyloidea, 1976.

No 6. Chabaud AG: Keys to Genera of the

Superfamilies Seuratoidea, Cosmoceroidea,

the Oxyuroidea,

Heterakoidea and Subuluroidea, 1976.

No 7. Lichtenfels JR: Keys to Genera of the
Superfamily Strongyloidea, 1980.

No 8. Lichtenfels JR: Keys to Genera of the
Superfamilies Ancylostomatoidea and

 

Diaphanocephaloidea, 1980.

No 9. Anderson RC, Bain O: Keys to the
Dioctophymatoidea, Rhabditoidea, Trichuroidea and
Muspiccoidea, 1982.

No 10. Durette-Desset MC: Keys to Genera of
the Superfamily ‘Trichostrongyloidea, 1983.

 

Bowman DD: Georgis’ Parasitology for Veterinarians.
7th edition. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co, 1999.

Brown HW, Neva EA: Basic Clinical Parasitology. Sth
edition. Norwalk, Connecticut, Appleton-Century-
Crofts, 1983.

Cheng TC: The Biology of Animal Parasites.

964.

Davis JW, Anderson RC (eds): Parasitic Diseases of
Wild Animals. Ames, lowa, lowa State University
Press, 1971.

Davis JW, Anderson RC, Karstad L, Trainer DO (eds):
Infectious and Parasite Diseases of Wild Birds.

Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1

Ames, lowa, Jowa State University Press, 1971.

Dunn AM: Veterinary Helminthology. London,
William Heinemann Medical Books Ltd., 1978.

Flynn RS: Parasites of Laboratory Animals. Ames,
lowa, lowa State University Press, 1973.

 

Forrester, D.: Parasites and Diseases of Wild Mammals
in Florida. Gainesville, Florida, University Press of
Florida, 1992.

Fowler ME (ed): Zoo &* Wild Animal Medicine. 2nd

14

edition. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1986.
Fowler ME (ed): Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine.
Current Therapy 3. Philadelphia, WéB. Saunders Co.,
1993.
Gaafer SM, Howard WE, Marsh RE (eds): Parasites,
Pests, and Predators. New York, Elsevier, 1985.
Gibbs HC, Herd RP, Murrell KD (eds): The Veterinary
Clinics of North America: Food Animal Practice—

 

Parasites: Epidemiology and Control. Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co. 1986.
Greene CE (ed): Infections Diseases of the Dog and
Cat. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co. 1990.
Grieve, RB (ed): The Veterinary Clinics of North
America: Small Animal Practice — Parasitic
Infections. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1987.
Gutierrez. Y: Diagnostic Pathology of Parasitic
Infection with Clinical Correlation. Philadelphia,
Lea and Febiger, 1990.
Hendrix CM: Diagnostic Veterinary Parasitology,
Mosby, 199
Herd RP (ed): The Veterinary Clinics of North
America: Equine Practice—Parasitology.
1986.
Kranz GW: A Manual of Acarology. 2nd edition.

  

 

Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co.,

Corvallis, Oregon, Oregon State University Book
Stores, 1978.

Lapage E (ed): Monnig’s Veterinary Hebninthology and
Entomology. Sth edition. Baltimore, Maryland,
William & Wilkins, 1962.

Lapage, G: Veterinary Parasitology. 2nd edition.
Springfield, Illinois, Charles C. Thomas, 1968.

Lee JJ, Hutner SH, Bovee EC (eds): An Ilustrated
Guide to the Protozoa. Lawrence, Kansas, Allen
Press, 1985.

Levine ND: Nematode Parasites of Domestic Animals
and of Man. 2nd edition. Minneapolis, Minnesota,
Burgess Publishing Co., 1980.

Levine ND: Protozoan Parasites of Domestic Animals
and Man. Minneapolis, Minnesota, Burgess

Co., 1980.

Levine ND: Textbook of Veterinary Parasitology.

Publishing

 

Minneapolis, Minnesota, Burgess Publishing
Company, 1978.

Monnig HO: Veterinary Helminthology and
Entomology. Sth edition. London, Bailliere, Tindall
and Cox, 1986.

Olsen OW: Animal Parasites: ‘Their Biology and Life
Cycles. 2nd edition. Minneapolis, Minnesota,
Burgess Publishing Co., 1967.

Plumb DC: Veterinary Drug Handbook. 3rd edition.
Ames, lowa, Iowa State University Press, 1998.

Samuel WM, Pybus MJ, Kocan AA: Parasitic Diseases
of Wild Mammals. 2nd edition. Ames, lowa, lowa
State University Press, 2001.

 
Schell. SC: Handbook of Trematodes of North America
North of Mexic
of Idaho, 1985.

Schmidt GA: Handbook of Tapeworm Identification.
Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press, 1986

Sloss MW, Kemp RL, Zajak AM: Veterinary Clinical
Parasitology. 6th edition. Ames, lowa, lowa State
University Press, 1994,

  

Moscow, Idaho, University Press

 

 

Soulsby EJL: Helminths, Arthropods and Protozoa of
Domesticated Animals (Monnig). Philadelphia, Lea
& Febiger, 1968.

Soulsby EJL: Textbook of Veterinary Clinical
Parasitology. Philadelphia, EA. Davis Company,
1965.

15

Gencral Parasitology

Thienpont D, Rochette F, Vanparijs OF: Diagnosing
Helminthiasis Through Coprological Fxamination.
Beerse, Belgium, Janseen Research Foundation,
1979.

Urquhart GM, Armour J, Duncan Jl. Dunn AM,
Jennings FW: Veterinary Parasitology. 2nd edition.
Oxford, England, Blackwell Science, 1996.

Wallach JD, Boever W J: Diseases of Exotic Animals.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1983.

Williams JF, Zajac A: Diagnosis of Gastrointestinal

 

Parasitism in Dogs and Cats. Ralston Purina
Company, Saint Louis, Missouri, 1980.
Section 3. we
PARASITES OF DOGS

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts

 

 

RELATIVE SIZES
OF DOG PARASITE EGGS

 

 

 

 

 

 

@

Mesocestoides sp.

 

_ Physaloptera

   

 

= : Ss praepultialis
Te Ie
Toxocara canis loxascaris leonina 32pm
87x 75um 82 x 70ym
37x 32pm Dipylidium caninum

Nanophyetus 50um es egg 45 en
salmincola 50um Oo 1-63 eggs / packe!
90x 45ym :

Isospora Isospora canis _
ohioensis

24x2Iym 36x 30pm _—

   

Ancylostoma ie = :

: aninum Uncinaria Capillaria__Trichuris vulpis
* 4 60 x 40m stenocephala aerophila  g0 x38 um Grain Mite Egg
Alaria canis 72 x 45ym 70x 35um 105 x 63 um

nonparasitic

122x76um

Fig. 7. Common parasite eggs and oocysts found in dog feces.

Vv SIS-UK VFL
Brno
Section 3

+" Location of Major Parasites

Zoonotic Diseases

Ectoparasites

Fleas - Ctenocephalides canis
Ctenocephalides felis

   
    

   

Parasites of Dogs

Echidnophaga spp.
Ticks - Ixodes spp.
Dermacentor spp.

Connective Tissue

Dipetalonema

Angiostrongylus cantonensis

 
 
    
  
 
 
 
   
  

Rhipicephalus sanguinius
Lice - Trichodectes canis

   
  

Linognathus setosus
Mites - Demodex canis

Capillaria plica

| Heart & Lungs
Otodectes cynotis

Sarcoptes scabei
Flies -Cuterebra spp. larvae

Dirofilaria immitis ‘4
Filaroides (Oslerus) osleri Y
Filaroides hirthi

Capillaria aerophila

Cecum & Colon

Trichuris vulpis

Gnathostoma

Spirocerca
Physaloptera Toxocara canis Taenia ovis
Toxascaris leonina Taenia serialis

Uncinaria stenocephala_—Taenia multiceps
Ancylostoma caninum —— Taenia hydatigena
Strongyloides stercoralis Taenia pisiformis
Dipylidium caninum

Echinococcus granulosus

Fig, 8. Locations of the major parasites found in dogs.

18
Table 12. Major zoonotic diseases associated with dogs

Parasites of Dogs

 

 

Organism Disease Method of Infection
Protozoa
Entomoeba histolytica Amoebiasis Ingestion

Leishmania donovani
Leishmania donovani

 

Pnenmnocystis carinii
Trypanosoma cruzi

Nematodes
Ancylostoma spp.
Dirofilaria immitis
Strongyloides spp.
Strongyloides stercoralis
Toxocara canis

Cestodes
Dipylidinm caninum
Echinococcus granulosus
Echinococcus multilocularis

Arthropods
Cheyletiella spp.
Sarcoptes scabiei

Visceral leishmaniasis
Cutaneous leishmaniasis
Pneumocystis infection
Trypanosomiasis

Cutaneous larva migrans
Dirofilariasis

Cutaneous larva migrans
Strongyloidiasis

Visceral larva migrans

Dipylidiasis
Hydatid cyst disease
Alveolar hydatid disease

Acariasis
Acariasis

Contact with arthropod vector
Contact with arthropod vector
Ingestion or inhalation

Contact with arthropod vector

Contact with larvae
Bite of mosquito

Contact with larvae
Ingestion of larvae
Ingestion of larvated eggs

Ingestion of cysticercoid in flea
Ingestion of eggs
Ingestion of eggs

Contact with infected dog
Contact with infected dog,

 

Visceral Larva Migrans

 

Fig. 9. Viscer
(See also page 21.)

 

al larva migrans caused by Toxocara canis.

   

Cutaneous Larva Migrans

Fig. 10. Curancous larva migrans “creeping eruptions”

caused by Ancylostoma spp. (See also page 22.)

19
Section 3

Drugs

Table 13. Efficacy of anthelmintics against major internal parasites of cats and dogs

 

 

 

   

Drug Common Trade Name Dose (mg/kg PO) Parasites Susceptible
Bunamidine HCL. Scolaban 25-50 Cestodes
Dichlorophene Various 220 Cestodes
Dichlorvos Task 5-33

Dicthylearbamazine

Disophenol
Dithiazanine Dizan
Epsiprantel Cestex

Kebantel + praziquantel
+ pyrantel pamoate

Fenbendazole Panacur
Ivermectin Ivomee
Ivomee
Heartgard
Mebendazole Telmintic
Mclarsomine Immidicide
Methylbenzene + Various
dichlorophene
Metronidazole Flagyl
Milbemycin oxime Interceptor
Niclosamide Yomesan
n-butyl chloride Various
is often mixed with toluene
Piperazine Various
Praziquantel Droncit
Praziquantel + pyrantel Drontal
Pyrantel pamoate Nemex
Selamectin Revolution
Thenium closylate + Various

piperazine

Caricide/Filaribits

Various/DNP

Drontal Plus

3.0-6.6 daily

25-100

7.5-10 (2nd dose in two weeks)
20 q 24hx 3-13 d

5.5 (dogs) 2.8 (cats)
q 24 hx 3d (dogs & cats)
Combination product

50q24hx3d

0.05
0.006 (30-day intervals)
20 q 24h x 3-20d

 

2.5 mg/kg IM, twice,
24 hours apart
200-275 mg/kg of each drug PO

25 q IZhx 5d (dog)
10-25 q 12 hx 5d (cat)
0.5 (30-day intervals)

100 (dog), 200 (cat)
Read the label

100-250 (2nd dose after 10
days), or 100-150 q 24 hx 2d

5-30

Combination product

15 (dog), 20-30 (cat)

6-12 (topical)

500 q24hx Id
250q 24hx2d

Ascarids, hookworms,
whipworms

Heartworm prevention (L4)

Ascarids

Hookworms

Miscellaneous nematodes,
heartworm microfilariae

Tapeworms

Tapeworms

Ascarids, hookworms,
whipworms, tapeworms

Ascarids, hookworms,
Giardia, whipworms,
‘Taenia spp. tapeworms

Whipworm, many other
nematodes

Heartworm microfilariae

Heartworm prevention

Ascarids, hookworms,
whipworms

Adult heartworms

Ascarids, hookworms,
cestodes
Giardia

Heartworm preventative,
hookworms, ascarids

Cestodes

Ascarids/hookworms

Ascarids

Cestodes

Cestodes, ascarids, hookworms

Ascarids, hookworms

Heartworm prevention,
hookworms, ascarids (cats),
many arthropods

Hook worms, ascarids

 

 

Note: Read label directions carefully. The label is the most authoritative source of information (See Courtney and

Sundlof, 1991).

20
Internal Parasites

Toxocara canis

Common name: Ascarid or roundworm (Ascaridoidea).
Size of adult: 7-18 cm in small intestine.

 

Size of egg: 80 um x 75 tm.

Importance: Larval migration causes liver and lung
damage and death in yourg dogs. Chronic ill
thrift, diarrhea, and pot belly appearance.
Visceral larva migrans in humans.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.

Treatment: Treat all puppies before 7 weeks of age,
treat all dogs when eggs are detected.

Dichlorvos, 100 mg/kg PO

Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24 h x 3 d, or treat
bitches 50 mg/kg PO q 24h from 40th day of
gestation until 3 days after whelping,

Mebendazole, 22 ma/kg PO q 24h x5 d

Piperazine, 110-200 mg/kg PO; repeat in 10 days,

Pyrantel, 5-10 mg/kg PO, treat bitches prior to
whelping.

 

Fig. 1 1b. Toxocara canis (arrows). Toxascaris leonina is

also shown (lower right).

21

   

Parasites of Dogs

     
 

Toxocara canis

Fig. 11a. Toxocara canis prepatent period is 6 weeks.

Fig. 11c. Toxocara canis.
 

Section 3

 

Toxascaris leonina

 

Trichuris vulpis

=>

Fig, 13a. Trichuris unlpis prepatent period is 3 months.

 

Ancylostoma caninum

\ SA a0

Fig. 14a. Ancylostoma caninum prepatent period is 2 weeks.

 

22

Toxascaris leonina

Common name: Ascarid or roundworm (Ascaridoidea).
Size of adult: 6-17 cm in small intestine.
Size of egg: $0 jim x 70 jm.
Importance: Chronic diarrhea and ill thrife, nota
zoonotic disease.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Treat when any eggs arc detected.
Dichlorvos, 100 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x3d
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24h x5 d
Piperazine, 110-200 mg/kg PO; repeat in 10 days.
Pyrantel, 5-10 mg/kg PO, bitches prior to whelping,
Note: A 1% solution of sodium hypochlorite removes
the albumin coat from ascarid eggs, and eggs can
then be washed away with steam sterilization.

Trichuris vulpis

 

Common name: Whipworm (Trichuroidea).
Size of adult: 3-8 cm in cecum.
Size of egg: 75 wm x 40 pm.
Importance: Typhlitis, weight loss, diarrhea. Not a
zoonotic disease.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Treat when any eggs are detected.
Dichlorvos, 30 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x3d
Ivermectin, 0.1 mg/kg SC PO
Mchendazole, 20 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 3-20 d
Note: Eggs in the environment are difficult to kill.
(Bleach x1 %), steam sterilization, and direct sun-
light arc helpful in kennel situations.

Ancylostoma caninum

Common name: Southern hookworm (Strongyloidea).
Size of adult: 8-16 mm in small intestine.
Size of egg: 60 tm x 40 pm.
Importance: Anemia, weakness, poor growth.
Cutaneous larva migrans in humans.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Treat when eggs are detected.
Buramisole, 2.4 mg/kg SC
Dichlorvos, 30 mg/kg PO
Disophenol, 2.2 mg/kg $C
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3d
Ivermectin, 0.05 mg/kg SC or PO
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3-5 d
Milbemycin oxime, 0.5 mg/kg, PO
Pyrantel, 5-10 mg/kg, PO
Thenium closylate, 50 mg/kg PO q 12 hx 1d
Note: For larvicidal treatment of kennels use sodium
borate (Borax) 10 Ib. per 100 ft? or 1% bleach.
   
  
   

Fig. 12b. Toxase

Fig. 13c. Trichuris vulpis.

  

Fig. 14b. Ancylostoma caninum.

Fig. 14c. Aucylostoma caninum.

23
Section 3

    
 

Uncinaria stenocephala

Nn nad

Fig. 15a. Uncinaria stenocephala prepatent period is 2 weeks.

 

Strongyloides stercoralis
en a’

Fig. 16a. Strongyloides stercoralis prepatent period is 1 week.

 

Dirofilaria immitis

Fig. 17a. Dirofilaria immitis prepatent period is 6-7 months.

Uncinaria stenocephala

 

Northern hookworm (Strongyloidea).
12 mm in small intestine.
5pm x 45 jum.

Common nam

 

Size of adult:
Size of
Importance

   

Less pathogenic than Ancylostoma spp. Worms have
cutting plates rather than teeth, Not
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Treat when eggs are detected.
Butamisole, 2.4 mg/kg SC
Dichlorvos, 30 mg/kg PO
Disophenol, 2.2 mg/kg SC
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24hx 3d
Ivermectin, 0.05 mg/kg SC or PO
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3-5 d
Pyrantel, 5-10 mg/kg PO
Thenium closylate, 50 mg/kg PO q 12 hx 1d

a zoonotic disease.

 

 

Strongyloides stercoralis

Common name: Threadworm (Rhabditoidea).

 

Size of adult: 0.7-2.2 mm in small intestine.

Size of egg: 55 yum x 30 fm.

Importance: Severe diarrhea, pneumonia and dermatitis. Causes
severe illness and diarrhea in human infants.

   
 

Diagnosis: Fecal flotation (must be very fresh), larvated eggs and

larvae in Feces, Baermann technique for larvae, skin scrap-

   

ing when dermatitis is involved. No transplacental or trans-
mammary infection.
Treatment: Treat when eggs or larvae are detected.
Diethylearbamazine, 100 mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO
Mebendazole, 20 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 3-14 d

Dirofilaria inunitis
Common name: Heartworm (Filarioidea).
Size of adult in heart: 12-30 cm microfilariac in blood.

Siz 5 jum x 6.7-7.0 jun.
Importance: Causes congestive heart failure in dogs, pulmonary

    

of microfilaria: 270-3

and skin lesions in humans.

Diagnosis: Microfilariac in blood. Knott's test, buffy coat exami-
nation, direct blood smear, millipore filtration of blood,
various serologic tests.

Note: Adult heartworms can live for 8 years.

Treatment for adults: Melarsomine dihydrochloride
(Immidicide), 2.5 mg/kg IM, given twice 24 hours apart.

‘Treatment for microfilariac: Ivermectin, 0.05 mg/kg $C or PO

Levamisole, 11 mg/kg PO q 24h x 7-10 d (given starting 2
weeks after caparsolate).
Milbemycin oxime, 0.5 mg/kg PO
Treatment as prophylaxis: Diethylearbamazine, 1.2 mg/kg PO q

 

24 h during mosquito season.
Ivermectin, 0.006 mg/kg PO every 30 days.
Milbemycin oxime, 0.5 mg/kg every 30 days.
Moxidectin, 0.03 mg/kg PO every 30 days.

 

lamectin, 6-12 mg/kg, (topically) every 30 days.

24
Parasites of Dogs

    
 

Fig. 15c. Uncinaria stenocephala.

Fig. 16c. Strongyloides stercoralis. Photo courtesy
Linda Mansfield.

 

Fig. 17b. Dirofilaria immitis. Fig. 17c. Dirofilaria immitis.

25
Section 3

Table 14. Comparison of microfilariae of Dirofilaria immitis and Dipetalonema reconditum

Parameter

Numbers present Many
Motility

Head shape

Acid phosphatase stain

Tapered

Tail Straight
Body Straight
Length by Knotts test (jm) 280-320
Length by filter test (jim) 235-285
Width by Knott's test (jum) 6.1-7.2

  

Width by filter rest (yum) 8-7.0

Dirofilaria immitis

Nonprogressive

Excretory, anal pores

Dipetalonema reconditum

Very few
Progressive
Blunt
Diffuse
Button hook
Curved
215-270
215-240
4.7-5.8

4-5

 

Table 14a. Interpretation of heartworm tests

 

Heartworm Microfilariae

Present in Knott’s Test Antigen Test

Results and [Recommendations]

 

Positive Positive
Negative Positive
Positive Negative
Negative Negative

Patent heartworm infection [I'reat with adulticide,
microfilaricide, use preventative]

False-negative Knot’s test, no adults present, immature
worms only, all male or female worms, treated with a
microfilaricide, antibody against microfilariae [Treat
with adulticide, use preventative]

False-positive Knott’s test, few worms present, recent
patent infection, immune response that removes or
masks the antigens detected in the serological tests,
misidentification of the microfilariae observed [Treat
with microfilaricide, use preventative]

No heartworms present, low worm burden, immature
worms present, immune mediated occult infection
[Use preventative if in heartworm transmission areal

 

Note: Modified Knott’s tests are generally used for microfilariae detection, and at this time antigen tests (ELISAs)

are primarily recommended for serological tests. (See Blagburn, 1994; Henry and Dillon, 1994).

26
Parasites of Dogs

¥¢

HEARTWORM DISEASE: A Diagnostic/Treatment Protoc

Sercening Test
De Fl
_ __ [Suse | a ceaheidiiael _ Benes sspeatnfeaton
|

   

       

 

      

 

   

 

 

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

          

  

 

 

     

Confirm With [near etworm
Antigen ‘Test* No-~-| oars e— dy C i - - <Cgges Infection
sy | Clinical Or
) Oe | Laboratory
_— |_Indications?
Ape Sercening i] on | [Gane wan
T L es —
(-) (+) ( i )
Repeat L. “Conduct Pretreatment Evaluation Using | i
Antigen, PATENT Appropriate Means. For Example, ia | OccuLr
test [(+)-*] INFECTION Radiography, Serum Chemistry Profile, FECTION |
—— Urinalysis, CBC, Worm Burden Estima |
T tion 1" And Other Tests As Indicated. |
eliotn | Take Any Corrective Steps Necessary |
we Before Adulticide Treatment, |
(For Patent |
latections ; Te]

Administer erm eee {Administer Adulticide |@ For |
Microfilaricide ‘yet eee
stil Sereenin Infections,
une screening | = [ee acy By Anigentes |, | Administer |

Fest Negative 12 Weeks After Adults Treated. | Preventive ‘

t vues Le perenne i
(+) t
‘ |

  

Fig. 18. Diagnostic protocol for diagnosis and treatment of heartworms (Dirofilaria inmitis).

“In addition to antigen test, radiography, echocardiography, antibody; and other rests may be used to aid diagnosis
:xperts believe that predicting worm burden could provide a useful guide for prognosis and treatment.
(With permission from Dr. Charles H. Courtney, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, and Agri Tech Systems, Inc.,
Portland, Maine.)

 

 

27
Section 3

¥

Dipetalonema reconditum

 

61-68 days.

 

Filaroides osleri

 

Fig. 20a. Filarvides (Oslerus) osteri in bronchi. F. birthi in
pulmonary parenchyma. Prepatent period is 10 weeks for

FE. osleri and 5 weeks for F. hirthi.

 

Physaloptera spp.

 

   

 

 

19a. Dipetalonema reconditum prepatent period is

la. Physaloptera spp. prepatent period is 58-83 days.

28

Dipetalonema reconditum

Common name: (Filarioidea).
Size of adult: 4-8 cm in subcutancous tissues,
Size of microfilariae: 215-270 jm x 4.7-5.8 um.

Slightly smaller than microfilariae of Dirofilaria
immitis (See Table 14).

Importance: Nonpathogenic. Must be differentiated
from Dirofilaria immitis because dogs infected
with Dipetalonema reconditum are not treated.

Diagnosis: Microfilariae in blood (See Table 14).

Treatment: None needed; nonpathogenic.

Filaroides osleri

Common name: Tracheal worm (Metastrongyloidea).
Size of adult:

 

5-15 mm. E osleri coiled in nodules at
bifurcation of trachea. Adult & birthi in pul-
monary parenchyma.

Size of first stage larva: In trachea 237-267 jim in Feces
325-378 jun,

Importance

 

 

Coughing, chronic tracheobronchitis.
Diagnosis: Larval in feces or sputum. Sputum smear,

transtracheal wash, or fecal flotation.
Treatment: Treatment is experimental.

 

Albendazole, 25
21 days)
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x 7d

Ivermectin, 0.4 mg/kg SC or PO

50 mg/kg PO q 12 x5 d (repeat in

Physaloptera spp.

Common name: Stomach worm (Spiruroidea).

Size of adult: 3-6 em in stomach.

40 pum « 30 jum.

ntrequently causes gastric mucosal ero-

Size of ef

 

  

Importance:
sion and gastritis; adults attach with mouth parts.
Diagnosis: Larvated eggs in feces. Fecal flotation or
worms in vomitus.
Treatment: ‘Treat when eggs are detected.
Dichlorvos, 27-33 mg/kg
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x 5d
Ivermectin, 0.05-0.5 me/kg, $C or PO
Parasites of Dogs

 

Fig. 21b. Physaloptera sp.

29
Section 3

DEFINITIVE HOSTS
with adult trematodes

   
     

MIRACIDIUM

ee 0

OXYTREMA-SNAIL
with rediae

SALMONID-FISH
with metacercariae

CERCARIA

Fig. 22a. Nanopbyetus salmincola prepatent period is 5-7
days. (See also Fig. 52j.)

 

Paragonimus kellicotti

©

Fig. 23a. Paragonimus kellicotti prepatent period is 5-6

weeks.

eC

Ss

Fig. 24a. Aluria spp. prepatent period is 35 days.

  

30

Nanophyetus salmincola

Common name: Salmon poisoning fluke
(Troglotrematidae).
Size of adult:

  

S-1.5 mm in small intestine.

Size of egg: 70 jm x 40 wm.

Importance: Vector for Neorickettsia helmintheca, etiologi-

cal agent of salmon poisoning disease in dogs.

Hemorrhagic enteritis with generalized lym-

phadenopathy, vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, inappe-
tence, fever, death.

Diagnosis: Gold, operculated eggs in feces. History, fecal
flotation in sugar or fecal smear, clinical signs.

Treatment of salmon poisoning (rickettsial disease):

Treatment is 1

 

sary.
Osytetracyeline, 7 mg/kg IV q 12h x 3d
Doxycycline, 10 mg/kg IV q 12h x7 d
Treatment of Nanopbyetus salmincola: Treatment may be
beneficial.

 

Praziquantel, 2.5-5 mg/kg PO or SC

Note: Freezing or cooking fish will kill metacercariac.

Paragonimus kellicotti

Common name: Lung fluke (Troglotrematidac).

Size of adult: 1.0-1.5 cm in hing.

Size of egg: 90 um x 50 pm.

Importance: May cause chronic respiratory disease.

Diagnosis: Gold operculated eggs in feces or sputum. Fecal

flotation in sugar or sputum smear.

Treatment: Treat when eggs are detected.
Albendazole, 25-50 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 14-21 d
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24 h x 10-14 d
Praziquantel, 25 mg/kg PO q 24h x2d

Alaria spp.

Common name: Intestinal fluke (Strigeidae).
Size of adult:

 

10 mm in small intestine.

Size of egg: 134 jum x 70 pum.

Importance: Mostly nonpathogenic. Lung migration may
cause some damage. Minor zoonotic potential from
larval stages from intermediate hosts.

 

Diagnosis: Eggs in sugar fecal flotation.

 

Treatment:

 

Parasites are of minor significance unless large
numbers are present.

Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg PO

Praziquantel, 10 mg/kg PO or SC
 

31

o Parasites of Dogs

rt

 

Fig. 23c. Paragonimus kell

Fig. 24c. Alaria sp. (arrow). The other two eggs are
Nanophyetus.

  
Section 3

 

CS Taenia pisiformis @

Fig. 25a, Tuenia pisiformis prepatent period is 2 months.

 

Dipylidium caninum

Fig. 26a, Dipylidium caninum prepatent period is
month.

  

as Echinococcus granulosus

_

Te
ay

Fig. 27a. Ecbinococens granulosus prepatent period is 50

  

Taenia pisifor mis

Common name: Tapeworm (Taeniidac).
Size of adult: Up to 20 m in small intestine.

38 yum x 32 pm.

«: Possible inte .
Importance: Possible intestinal obstructions with heayy

Size of

 

infections. The usual Taenia in dogs is Taenia
Pisiformis, which is acquired by cating cysticerei
in rabbits.
Diagnosis: Segments in feces or on perianal region, eggs
in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Treat when eggs or segments are detected.
Bunamidine, 25-50 mg/kg PO
Dichlorophene, 220 mg/kg PO
Epsiprantel, 5.5 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3d
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 3-5 d
Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg PO
Praziquantel, 2.5-5 mg/kg PO

Dipylidium caninum

Common name: Flea tapeworm (Dilepididac).
Size of adult: 15-75 em in small intestine.

Size of egg: 25 tm-30 um in oblong packets of 20 or

 

 

Fewer eggs. Eggs packets are 200 fm x 150 pm.
Importance: Indicates the presence of fleas. Anal pruri-
tus, chronic enteritis, vomiting, or nervous disor-

ders may result, Will infect humans.

 

Diagnosis: Segments on feces or perianal region, fecal
flotation.
Treatment: Treat when eggs or segments are detected.
Bunamidine 25-50 mg/kg PO
Dichlorophene, 220 mg/kg PO
Epsiprantel, 5.5 mg/kg PO
Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg PO

Praziquantel, 2.5-5 mg/kg PO

 

 

hand 5

    

Echinococcus granulosus (see also Figs.

Common name: Hydatid tapeworm (Taeniidae).
Size of adult: 2-9 mm in small intestine.

Size of egg: 35 ptm x 30 pum,

 

Importance: Mild disease in carnivores; highly patho-
genic or Fatal in humans (hydatid cyst).
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.

 

gs are indistin-

2s.
Treatment: Treat all dogs if suspected.

    
 

guishable from Taenia spp.

Bunamidine, 20-50 mg/kg (repeat in 2 days and in |
month).
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3-5 d

0 myfky (preferred treatment).

 

 

Praziquantel, 2
Prevention: Do not feed infected sheep or wild rumi-
nant viscera to dogs.
___ Parasites of Dogs

 

Fig. 25c. Taenia sp.

 

Fig. 26b. Dipylidium canimon.

 

Fig. 27b, Echinococcus granulosus. Fig. 27c. Echinococeus granulosus.

33
Section 3

 

 

Sarcocystis sp.

—

Fig. 29a. Sarcocystis sp. prepatent period is 9-10 days.

   

Giardia canis

Fig. 30a. Giardia canis prepatent period is 1 week.

Isopora spp.

Common name: Coccidia (Apicomplexa).

Size of oocyst: Isospora obioensis 24 jim x 21 jum;
Isospora bigimina 13 stm x 10 um; Isospora canis
36 pun x 30 yum.

Importance: May cause hemorrhagic enteritis, diarrhea,
poor growth. Primarily in puppics.

 

Diagnosis: Oocysts in fecal flotation; in small intestine.
Treatment: Treat if more than 1,000 oocyst/g and diar-
rhea is present.
Sulfadimethoxine, 55 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 10 days, or
until asymptomatic for 2 days.
Prevention: Same as treatment.
Decoquinate, at 1 mg/kg PO is used experimentally.
Note: lonophores can be toxic in dogs and cats.
Amprolium, 100-200 mg/kg q 24 h x 7 days (treat-
ment or prevention).

Sarcocystis spp.

Common name: None (Apicomplexa).

 

Size of sporocyst: 16 wm x 11 jim in small intestine.

 

Importance: Usually nonpathogenic, but is economical-
ly important in intermediate hosts used For food
animals.

Diagnosis: Oocysts or sporocysts in fecal flotation.

Treatment: None available.

Prevention: Do not feed raw meat to dogs.

Giardia canis

Common name: None (Mastigophora).

 

Size of cyst: 18 yum x 10 yim; trophozoite: 17 jm x 10
um in small and large intestine.

Importance: Diarrhea, transmissible to humans.

Diagnosis: Trophozoites or cysts in fecal flotation or
smear (must use fresh fecal material). Several

A tests are available.

 

Treatment: Treat if diarrhea and Giardia are present.
Carnidazole, 5 mg/kg q 24 hx 3 days
Metronidazole, 50 mg-70/kg PO q 24h x5 d
Quinacrine, PO or IM

Large dogs: 200 mg q 8 hx I dor 200 mg q 12h
x6d
Small dogs: 100 mg q 12h x1 dor 100 mg q 24h
x6d
Puppies: 50 mg q 12h x6 d
Cats: 10 mg/kg q 24h x 12 d
Albendazole, 25 mg/kg q 12 hx 2 d (4 treatments)
Carnidazole, 5 mg/kg q 24h x 3d
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg q 24h x 3d
Prevention: Giardia vaccines may be useful in chronic

cases.

34
Parasites of Dogs

. Isospora sp. (dividing).

Fig. 29c. Sarcocystis sp. Note sporozoites (arrows).

 

       

Fig. 30b. Giardia canis (cysts stained). Fig. 30c. Giardicr canis (cysts in sugar flotation). Cytoplasm

is compressed at one end.

35

 
Section 3

 

Fig, 31. Tuenia bydatigena prepatent period is 7 weeks.

Fig. 33. Tuenia krabbei prepatent period is 7-8 weeks.

 

36

Taenia hydatigena

 

Common name: Sheep tapeworm (Taeniidae).
Size of adult: 75-500 cm in small intestine.

Size of egg: 38 jum x 32 fun. Essentially the same for

 

most Taenia spp. in dogs. Cysticerei in peritoneal
cavity of sheep.
Importance:

 

cow pathogenicity, source of infection For
sh

 

Pp.

 

Diagnosis: Eggs in Fecal flotation, segments in Feces or
on perianal

‘Treatment: Bunamidine, 2.

 

 

 

—50 mg/kg PO
Dichlorophene, 220 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3d
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3-5 d
Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg, PO

Praziquantel, 2.5-5.0 mg/kg, PO

Taenia multiceps

 

Common name: Gid tapeworm (Taeniidae).

Size of adult: 40-100 cm in small intestine.

 

Size of

 

38 yim x 32 pm.

 

Importance: Low pathogenicity. In sheep, the Cocnurus
stage in the brain causes central nervous system
disorders (gid).

Diagnosis

 

Eggs in Fecal flotation, segments in feces or
on perianal region.

Treatment: Bunamidine, 25-50 mg/kg, PO
Dichlorophene, 220 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3d
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24h 3-5 d
Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg, PO
Praziquantel, 2.5-5.0 mg/kg PO

Taenia krabbei

Common name: Deer or moose tapeworm (Tacniidae).
Size of adult: 26-100 cm in small intestine.

Size of egg: 38 jun x 32 fun.

  

Importance: Low pathogenicity. Cysticerci in muscles
of mule deer, caribou, ancl moose.

Diagnosis:

 

Eggs in fecal flotation, segments in feces or
on perianal region.

Treatment: Bunamidine, 25-50 mg/kg PO
Dichlorophene, 220 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3d
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24 h3-s d
Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg PO
Praziquantel, 2.5-5.0 mg/kg PO
   

4
Vo aerophila

Fig, 34. Capillaria (Eucolens) aerophila prepatent period is
40 days.

 

 

Fig. 35. Dracunculus insignis and D. medinensis prepatent
period is 10-14 months.

 

Fig. 36. Diphyllobothrium latiun prepatent period is 3-4
weeks.

37

Parasites of Dogs

Capillaria aerophila

Common name: Fox lungworm (Trichuroidea).

 

Size of adult: 2.5-3.2 cm in lungs.
Size of egg: 70 wm x 35 jm.

Importance: May cause respiratory distress.

  

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.

Treatment: Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3-5 d
mg/kg, PO or SC

Levamisole, 2.5 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 5d

 

Ivermectin, 0.

Dracunculus insignis

Common name: Guinea worm, dragon worm, firey ser-
pent (Dracunculoidea).
200 em in subcutancous tissue.

 

Size of adult:
Size of larvae: 500-750 tun.

Importance: Low pathogenicity, swellings on tibia and

 

tarsus, nonhealing ulcers.
Diagnosis: Nonhealing skin ulcers, isolation of larvae
from the ulcers.
Treatment: Bunamidine, 25-50 mg/kg PO
Dichlorophene, 220 mg/kg, PO
Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg PO
5.0 mg/kg PO or SC

  

Praziquantel, 2

Surgical removal

Diphyllobothrium latun

Common name: Broad fish tapeworm (Pscudophy'llidea).

Size of adult: Up to 15 m in small intestine.

Size of egg: 75 wm x 45 pun.

Importance: Low pathogenicity. Reservoir of the infec

tion for humans.

Diagnosis: Eggs in Fecal flotation.

Treatment: Praziquantel, 7.5 mg/kg PO or SC q 24h x 2d
Praziquantel, 35 mg/kg PO

Human:

 

Niclosamide (Yomesan), 2 g PO (once)
Praziquantel, 5-20 mg/kg PO (once)
Section 3

   
 

Thelazia californiensis

oO

\

Fig. 38. Thelazia californiensis prepatent period is 16-20
days.

 

Dioctophyma renale /
Vee EOEEeEEeaeeSEOEES

  

a

Fig. 39. Dioctophyma renale life cycle is up to 2 years.

38

Spirocerca Inpi (See also Fig. 52k)

Common name: Esophageal worm (Spiruroidea).

Size of adult: 3-8 em in esophagus and stomach,

Size of egg: 40 wm x 12 pm, larvated.

Importance: May predispose to malignant tumors and
dystrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy.

Diagnosis: Eggs in feces in patent infections.

Treatment: Diethylcarbamazine, 500 mg/kg PO q 24h
x 10d

Prevention: Do not feed raw chicken to dogs.

Thelazia californiensis

Common name: Eyeworm (Spiruroidea).

Size of adult: 10-40 mm in conjunctival sac

Size of egg: 55 jum x 35 jum.

Importance: May cause conjunctivitis, lacrimation,
photophobia.

 

Diagnosis: Eggs in lachrymal secretions, Parasites can
be seen in conjunctival sac.

Treatment: Surgical removal of worms from the con-
junctival sac under local anesthesia.

Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM

Dioctophyma renale

Common name: Giant kidneyworm
(Dioctophymoidea).

Size of adult: 35-105 cm in kidney.

Size of egg: 65 jun x 42 fm.

Importance:

Diagnosis:

Destroy renal tissue, may cause peritonitis.

  
  
 

 

ys in urine.
Treatment:

 

uurgical removal.
Prevention: Do not feed raw crayfish or fish (the inter-
mediate hosts).
Parasites of Dogs

External Parasites (See also page 48)

  

Trichodectes canis

Fig. 40a. Life cycle of Trichodectes canis. Fig. 40b. Trichodectes canis. (See also Fig. 2b.)

Trichodectes canis

Common name: Biting louse of dogs (Mallophaga). Adults, nymphs, eggs in hair. In cats, the biting louse is Felicola stub-
stratus (uncommon).
Size of adult: 2-4 mm. Life cycle is 3 weeks.

  

Importance: Cause roughened hair coat, itching, dermatitis. May act as intermediate host of Dipylidium caninum.

 

Diagnosis: Examination of the hair for adults, nymphs, and eggs (nits).
Treatment: Carbaryl, coumaphos, diazinon, dioxathion, fenchlorphos (ronnel), lindane, methoxychlor, rotenone,
pyrethrins, pyrethroids: treat twice, 7 days apart.

Note: Many flea control products also kill lice and ticks.

  

Linognathus setosus :

Fig. 41a. Life cycle of Linognathus setosus. Fig, 41b. Linognathus setosus.

Linognathus setosus

Common name: Sucking louse of dogs (Anoplura).

Size of adult: 2-3 mm. Life cycle is 3 weeks.

Importance: Cause skin irritation, itching, dermatitis, alopecia, anemia, roughened hair coat.

Diagnosis: Examine hair for adults, nymphs, eggs (nits).

Treatment; Carbaryl, coumaphos, diazinon, dioxathion, fenchlorphos (ronnel), ivermectin, lindane, methoxychlor,
rotenone, pyrethrins, pyrethroids.

39
 

Ww gsi)
g Re

i\ 9
Ri
\ Ctenocephalides spp.

Sa

Fig. 42a. Life cycle of Ctenocephalides canis and C. felis. Fig. 42b. Ctenocephalides felis.

Ctenocephalides canis

Common name: Flea.

Size of adult; 3-4 mm. Life cycle is variable.

Size of egg: 0.5 mm.

Importance: Infest dogs and cats. Flea bite dermatitis, anemia, vector for Dipylidium caninum, tularemia, plague, etc.
Adule fleas infest mammals transiently. Eggs, larvae, and pupae are in the environment.

Diagnosis: Examination of skin for adult fleas and “flea dirt”, dermatitis.

Treatment: Major drugs used for flea control include fipronil (Frontline®) for adult fleas, ticks, and some mites and
lice; imidocloprid (Advantage®) for adult fleas and some lice, but no mites or ticks; nitenpyram (Capstar®) for
adult fleas only; and selamectin (Revolution®) for adult fleas, flea eggs, ear mites, sarcoptic mange, and some

arbaryl, chlorfenvinphos, chlorpyri-

 

ticks. Other drugs that can be effective in a flea control program include
fos, dichlorvos, fipronil, imidocloprid, phosmet, propoxur, pyrethrins, pyrethroids, and insect growth regula-
tors, such as methoprene and lufenuron. Use as sprays, dips, dab ons, collars, etc.

Note: Treat host and environment.

Additional methods for treating the home environment are sodium poly borate (Fleabusters)and nematode larvae
(Steinernema carpocapsae).

Note: Fleas die when held below 20°F for 48 hours or at 120ceF (dry heat) for several days.

Table 15. Fleas commonly encountered
HEAD THORAX ABpoMen on animals and birds

 

   

Ctenocephalides canis Dog flea

‘Antenna 7 ; " >
eye Ctenocephalides felis Cat flea
Pulex irritans Human flea
Geral com> a .
Echidnophaga gallinacea ___ Sticktight flea
Maxitary palpus ,
Labial palpus Xenopsylla cheopis Oriental rat flea
Mesopiewron Cediopsylla simplex Rabbit flea
coxa .
Tecan Leptopsylla segnis Mouse flea
Femur Nosopsyllus fasciatus Northern rat flea
“ia Diamanus mertanus Ground squirrel flea
Tarsus

Orchopeas howardii Squirrel flea
Ceratophyllus nige Western hen flea

Fig. 43. Basic morphology of a flea.

40

  
Genaland prorotat
combs present

a_i

Gena comb of Sormore Genalcombot 4 spines

‘ines. Eyes present Eyeabseat
T —__ Leptopsyita
Genal como Genalcomb a
horizontal vertical
Spies pointed spines blunt

Cedtopsyta
sialon

Headrounded Head fat
Spine tof genat Spine land spine
comb distinctly Nofgenatcome
shorter than) approximately
spinel! ‘equalin length
Ctenocephaides __Clenacephatises

canis teas

Pronatal comb
present

g

Labia pipe
extending beyond
wochanterotleg

Labia patpsnot
extendag beyond
lwochanteroffeg

&

Rodent Diamanus
‘eae montanus

Nosopsyius

orthopeas

Fig, 44. Simplified key to the common fleas of animals and birds.

Parasites of Dogs —

Genalandpronotal
‘combs abeent

(7

Front margin of
hesdrounded
Thoraxnosnsl

@X7

esopleuron aot
divided by vertical
thickening

&

Puex

Front margin of
head angular
Trosarcontiected

cal

Echisnophaga
galinacea

esopleuron divided
by vertealrodtke
thickening

Mesopleuton

Xenopsyila
cheopis

 

Cuterebra_ sp.

Fig. 45a. Life cycle of Cuterebra sp.

Cuterebra spp.

Common name: Rodent bot fly (Diptera).

Fig. 45b. Cuterebra sp.

Size of larvae: Upto.45 mm. Larvae are subcutaneous.
Importance: Infest dogs and cats. Larvae infest rodents, companion animals, and occasionally, humans. Act as an irri-

tant; migration may be fatal. Only larvae infest mammals. Eggs, pupae, and adult flies are in the environment.
Rodents are the usual host. Larvae are in host for 1-2 months.
Diagnosis: Cutaneous lump with a breathing hole, large light to dark-red larvae with dark spines.

Treatment:

Careful extraction of larvae, antimicrobial treatment of wound.

41
Section 3

  

Sarcoptes scabiei

Fig. 46a. Life cycle of Sarcoptes scabiei (canis). The life cy- Fig. 4b. Sarcoptes scabiei (canis). Note the long, unjoint-
cle is 2-3 weeks. ed pedicels.

Sarcoptes scabiei

Common name: Mange mite (Sarcoptidae). Rare in cats; cats usually have Notoedres cati.
Size of adult: 400-600 jum. Larvae (6 legs) and nymphs (8 legs) are smaller.
ause intense itching, dry and thickened skin that becomes crusty. Infestation usually starts on head and spreads.

 

Importance:
Diagnosis: Deep skin scraping at periphery of lesions; adults, nymphs, larvae (6 legs), and eggs. The pedicels on the legs are
long, without joints (see arrows in figure). Sarcoptes is often difficult to diagnose. Mites are burrowing mites in skin.

 

Treatment: Clip hair and bathe.
Amitraz, benzyl benzoate, lime-sulfur, lindane, malathion, phosmet, ivermectin: 0.2 mg/kg PO, selamectin 6-12 mg/kg
(topically)
Note: If you suspect Sarcoptes, treat for it.

 

So <b + =o oo e
Demodex spp. Fig. 47b. Demodex canis.

Fig. 47a. Life cycle of Demodex canis.

Demodex canis

Common name: Follicular mange mite (Demodecidae). In cats, Demodex spp. are rare.
Size of adult: 200-300 ptm. Life cycle is approximately 21 days.
Areas of alopecia on head, neck, and forelimbs; pyoderma, pruritus. Infection may be localized or generalized.

 

Importane

Diagnosis: Deep skin scraping when skin is squeezed. Face and lips are best areas. Mites are in hair follicles and skin glands.

 

Treatment: Over 90% cure spontaneously.
Amitraz (0.025%) dip every 2 weeks
Rotenone dip (1%)
Experimental: Milbemycin, 2 mg/kg q 24h for at least 3 months. Ivermectin, up to 0.6 mg/kg q 24 h until resolved. Start at
0.1 mg/kg the first day, 0.2 the second day, etc. Treatments may last for several months.

42
Parasites of Dogs

 

Otodectes cynotis Fig. 48b. Otodectes cynotis.

Fig. 48a. Life cycle of Otodectes cynotis.

Otodectes cynotis

Common name: Ear mite (Psoroptidae) of dogs and cats.
Size of adult: 500-800 jum. Life cycle is 18-21 days.
Importance: Intense pruritus of ear canal which may be followed by self-mutilation, otitis media, and bacterial infection.
Diagnosis: Viewing mites on otoscopic examination or on an ear swab. Mites can be seen under a dissecting microscope or
placed on a slide under a microscope (adults, nymphs, larvae, and eggs). Mites in the ear; occasionally on body.
Treatment: Use a ceruminolytic agent first to remove crusty debris.
Carbaryl, cythioate, pyrethrins, rotenone: use 1 drop per ear weekly for 4 weeks.
Ivermectin, 0.2-0.4 mg/kg PO, SC, or diluted drop in the ear.

Selamectin, topically.

 

Cheyletiella spp.

 

Fig. 49a. Life cycle of Cheyletiella parasitovorax. Fig. 49b. Cheyletiella parasitovorax.

Cheyletiella spp.

Common name: Fur mite of dogs and cats, walking dander (Cheyletidae). Surface mites. C. parasitavorax in rabbits, C. yasguri
in dogs, C. blakei in cats.

Size of adult: 300-500 jum. Life cycle is 18-21 days.

Importance: Mild alopecia and pruritus; many animals asymptomatic; may cause dermatitis in humans.

 

Diagnosis: Superficial skin scraping, close visual examination of hair coat, rough brushing of animal, and examining dander.
Treatment: Carbaryl, dichlorvos collars, malathion, pyrethrins, pyrethroids. Treat host and environment.

Ivermectin, 0.3 mg/kg twice at S-week intervals.

Lime sulfur dip for pregnant or debilitated animals (4 02. per gal HO).

43
  
  
  
    

 
  

Section 3

 

 

ost Rhipicephalus sanguineus

BIS one?

Fig. 50a. Life cycle of Rhipicephalus sanguineus.

Fig. S0b. Rhipicephalus sanguinens.

   

Rhipicephalus sanguineus

 
    
 

  

Common name: Brown dog tick (Ixodidae).
Size of adult: 0.7-1.0 cm. Life cycle is 6 weeks to 1 year
‘Importance: Irritant, may cause anemia and tick paralysis when present in large numbers. Vector for canine babesiosis anc

  
    

canine erlichiosis. Problem in dog kennels.
nosis: Three-host tick; all motile stages (larva, nymph, adult) can be on the dog or in the environment. Ticks are only
dogs transiently to feed.
ent: Fipronil, carbaryl, chlorfenvinphos, dichlorvos, dioxathion, propoxur, pyrethrins, pyrethroids. Treat both the.
environment. Organophosphates, such as diazinon, are often used to treat the outside environment.

    
 

  
     

    

Diagnosis: serology. Trophozoites are in red blood cells of dogs.
Treatment: Diminazene aceturate, 3.
Imidocarb dipropionate, 5 mg/kg or

Phenamidine isothionate, 15 mg/kg q 24h x2d SC

44

 

    
   
 
 

Protozoan Parasit

   
    
    
     

‘imately 10 jum in diameter.

 

Neospora caninum

Common name: Neospora caninum.

Stages in dogs: Tissue cyst (pseudocyst), tachyzoites, and oocysts.

Size of pseudocyst and oocysts < 100 jim (pseudocyst), 10-11 jim (oocyst). :
Importance: Transmitted transplacentally or orally. May cause ascending paralysis and rigid contra‘

Lesions include necrosis, inflammation, encephalomyelitis, hepatitis, myocarditis, myo:

Diagnosis: Clinical signs and histologically. :
Treatment: Drugs for the treatment or prevention of other coccidia may be helpful.
Note: Dogs are definitive hosts. Oocyts in dogs are 10-11 jim and sporulate in 3 days.

Bibliography (see pages 63-68)

45

 
S600 O06 OOUCOCUVUUUUYYwuouwseeeec cre

Section 4

PARASITES OF CATS

Miscellaneous Parasites

 

 

 

MISCELLANEOUS PROTOZOAN PARASITES

 

 

 

 

 

  

Babesia spp. Cytauxzoon sp. Trypanosoma sp.
(intraerythrocytic ) (intraerythrocytic) (extraerythrocytic)

 

H. felis H. canis gametocyte schizont pseudocyst
Haemabartonella_ spp. Hepatozoon canis Toxoplasma gondii
(epierythrocytic) (intraleukocytic - gametocyte) {intracellular cyst)

(intramuscular- schizont [250 um]})

Fig. 52a. Miscellaneous protozoan parasites detected in blood and tissues of dogs and cats. Note: Haemobartonella spp. are
rickettsiae.

47
 

Section 4

Miscellaneous External Parasites of Cats and Dogs

  

Fig. 52b. Broad head of the dog-biting louse Trichodectes Fig. 52c. Unusual head of the cat-biting louse Felicola sub-

canis.
ostratus,

   

Fig. 52e, Ornithonyssus sp., a rodent and bird mite occa-
sionally found on dogs and cats.

 

Fig. 52g. Another kind of larval chigger
sometimes found on dogs and cats.

 

Fig. 52£. Larval chigger sometimes found on
dogs and cats.

48
      
      

-occus grantlosus (Cestoda) (2-3
stine of a dog or cat.

  

Fig, 52i. A section of a hydatid cyst of E. granulosus from
a sheep, human, etc. Note the numerous scolices (arrows).

  

Fig. 52}. Adult Nanopbyetus salmincola (Trematoda) (1-2 -
mm) from the small intestine of a dog. Fig. 52k. Cross sections of Spirocerca lupi (Nematoda)
: from the esophagus of a dog. :

Fig. 521. Gy Nematoda) egg from fecal
flotation of a cat. Adults are in the stomach of carnivores.

8 Ess Fig. 52m. Trichomonas (Tritrichomonas) sp. (flagellated
protozoan) from the feces of a clog. Pathogenicity is un-
known.

49
s

Section 4

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts

 

 

RELATIVE SIZES
OF CAT PARASITE EGGS

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

Isospora Isospora
felis rivolta
42 x35ym 22 x 17m
Toxocara cati
75 x 65 ym
50m ®
50um Toxoplasma gondii

12x 10m

  

Toxascaris leonina

 

Taenia taeniaeformis

80x 68ym Capillaria 37 x 31m
aerophila
70x 35pm
Fig. 53. Common parasite eggs and oocysts found in cat feces.

50

 

Dipylidium caninum

egg 45 x 45um
1-63 eggs / packet

Ancylostoma
caninum

60x 40pm
Parasites of Cats

Location of Major Parasites

Parasites of Cats anoeweense

Fleas - Ctenocephalides felis
Ctenocephalides canis

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Echidnophaga
M Ticks - Uncommon
i. Lice - Felicola subrostratus
SS Mites - Notoedres
\* 4 Otodectes
Heart & Lungs <7 “fy Cheyletiella
) Flies -Cuterebra spp. larvae
Dirofilaria immitis
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus “wy ) a aa Bladder
Capillaria aerophila ——
Capillaria sp
Stomach
Ollulanus tricuspis Small Intestine
Physaloptera sp. Toxocara cati Taenia (Hydatigera) taeniaeformis
Gnathostoma sp. Toxascaris leonina Dipylidium caninum
Ancylostoma tubaeforme Isospora spp.
Uncinaria stenocephala Toxoplasma gondii

Echinococcus multilocularis

Fig, 54. Locations of the major parasites found in cats, Note: Trichuris spp. are very rare in cats. Heartworms are becoming
more prevalent in cats (see dogs). Tritrichomonas foetus may cause large bowel disease (Levy et al. 2003. J Parasitol 89:99-
104.)

51
Section 4

Zoonotic Diseases

4 i Table 16. Major zoonotic diseases associated with cats

 

Organism Disease Method of Infection
Protozoa
Toxoplasma gondii ‘Toxoplasmosis Ingestion of oocysts

Trypanosoma cruz

Nematodes
Ancylostoma spp.
Dirofilaria inunitis
Lagocheilascaris minor
Strongyloides spp.
Gnathostoma spinigerum
loxocara cati

Trematodes
Paragonimus spp.

Cestodes
Dipylidium caninun
Echinococcus multilocularis
Pscudophyllidian tapeworms

Arthropods
Cheyletiella spp.
Sarcoptes scabiei
Notoedres cati

Trypanosomiasis

Cutaneous larva migrans
Dirofilariasis
Lagocheilascariasis
Cutaneous larva migrans
Visceral larva migrans
Visceral larva migrans

Paragonimiasis

Dipylidiasis
Echinococcosis

Sparganosis

Acariasis
Acariasis

Acariasis

Arthropod vector

Contact with larvae
Mosquito vector

Ingestion of larvated eggs
Contact with larvae
Ingestion of larvated

 

Ingestion of larvated

Ingestion of metacercariae

Ingestion of cysticercoid from fleas
Ingestion of eggs
Ingestion or contact with larvae

Contact with infected cat
Contact with infected cat
Contact with infected cat

 

 

 

TOXOPLASMA vs. ISOSPORA

 

SPORULATED

Toxoplasma sp.

Fig. 55a. Life cycle of Toxoplasma gondii.

 

Fig. 55b. Comparison of Toxoplasma with Isospora oocysts.

52
Drugs

Table 17. Efficacy of anthelmintics against major internal parasites of cats and dogs

Parasites of Cats

 

Drug
Bunamidine HCL
Dichlorophene
Dichlorvos

Diethylcarbamazine

Disophenol
Dithiazanine

Epsiprantel
Febantel + praziquantel

+ pyrantel pamoate
Fenbendazole

Ivermectin

Mebendazole
Melarsomine
Mcthylbenzene +
dichlorophene
Metronidazole

Milbemycin oxime

Niclosamide
n-butyl chloride

Common Trade Name

Scolaban
Various.

Task
Caricide/Filaribits

Various/DNP
Dizan

Cestex
Drontal Plus

Panacur

Ivomec
Ivomec
Heartgard
Telmintic
Immidicide
Various
Flagyl

10-25 q 12
Interceptor

hx 5d (cat)

Yomesan
Various

is often mixed with toluene

Piperazine

Praziquantel
Praziquantal + pyrantel
Pyrantel pamoate
Selamectin

Thenium closylate +
piperazine

Various

Droncit
Drontal
Nemex
Revolution

Various

Dose (mg/kg, PO)

25-S0
220
5-33

3.0-6.6 daily

25-100

7.5-10 (2nd dose in two weeks)
20 q24hx 3-13 d

 

5.5 (dogs) 2.8 (cats)
24 hx 3 d (dogs & cats)
Combination product

50 q24hx3d

0.2 SC

0.05
0.006 (30-day intervals)
20 q 24h x 3-20d

 

2.5 mg/kg IM, twice,
24 hours apart
200-275 mg/kg of each PO

25 q 12h x Sd (dog)
0.5 (30-day intervals)

100 (dog), 200 (cat)
Read the label

100-250 (2nd close after 10
days), or 100-150 q 24h x 2d

5-50

Combination product

15 (dog), 20-30 (cat)

6-12 (topical)

500q24hx1d
250q 24hx2d

Note: Read label directions carefully. The label is the most authoritative source

Sundlof, 1991).

53

Parasites Susceptible

 

todes

Cc

Cestodes

 

Ascarids, hookworms,
whipworms

Heartworm prevention (L4)

Ascarids

Hookworms

Miscellaneous nematodes,
heartworm microfilariae

‘Tapeworms

‘Tapeworms

Ascarids, hookworms,
whipworms, tapeworms

Ascarids, hookworms,
Giardia, whipworms,
‘Taenia spp tapeworms

Whipworm, many other
nematodes

Heartworm microfilariae

Heartworm prevention

Ascarids, hookworms,
whipworms

Adult heartworms

Ascarids, hookworms,
cestodes.
Giardia

Heartworm preventative,
hookworms

Cestodes

Ascarids/hookworms

Ascarids

Cestodes

Cestodes, ascarids, hookworms

Ascarids, hookworms

Heartworm prevention,
hookworms, ascarids (cats),
many arthrodpods

Hookworms, ascarids

of information (See Courtney and
Section 4

 

Toxocara cati

Fig. 56a. Toxocara cati prepatent period is 50 days.

7 sal

A ie leonina

®.—

Fig, 57a. Toxascaris leonina prepatent period is 74 days.

   

 

Ancylostoma tubaeformae

Wa 9S

Fig, 58a. Ancylostoma tubacformae prepatent period is
22-25 days.

Internal Parasites
Toxocara cati

Common name: Asearid or roundworm (Ascaridoidea),
Adult size: 4-12 cm in small intestine.
Size of egg: 75 um x 65 Lum.

 

 

Importan inted growth, damage due to migrations
of larvae; possible cause of visceral larval migrans
in humans.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.

 

Treatment: Treat when eggs are detected.
Dichlorvos, 100 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 3d
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24h x 5d
Piperazine, 100-200 mg/kg PO, repeat in 10 days
Pyrantel, 10-20 mg/kg PO
Selamectin, 7-13 mg/kg topically

Toxascaris leonina

Common Name: Ascarid or roundworm (Ascaridoidea).
Adult size: 3-10 cm in small intestine.

80 yum x 70 pm.

Unthriftiness in kittens.

Size of eg

 

Importan:

 

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.

Treatment: Treat when eggs are detected.
Dichlorvos, 100 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3d
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24h x 5d
Piperazine, 100-200 mg/kg PO, repeat in 10 days.
Pyrantel, 10-20 mg/kg PO

Ancylostoma tubaeformae

Common name: Hookworm (Strongyloidea).

Adult size: 9-15 mm in small intestine.

Size of egg: 60 pun x 40 wm.

Importance: Interdigital dermatitis, pulmonary lesions in

 

heavy infestations, anemia, and poor hair coat.

 

Diagnosis gs in fecal flotation.
‘Treatment: Treat when eggs are detected.
Dichlorvos, 11 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 100 mg/kg PO or 50 mg/kg q 24h x 3.d
Mebendazole, 25 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 3-5 d
Pyrantel, 20-30 mg/kg PO
Selamectin, 7-13 mg/kg topically
Thenium closylate, 100-200 mg/kg PO
Toluene, 0.22 mg/kg PO
Parasites of Cats

 

Fig. S6c. Toxocara cati.

    

 

Fig. 57b. Toxascaris leonina, Larvated eggs (left), normal
egg (right).

 

iscaris leonina.

   

Fig. 58c. Ancylostoma tubaeformae.
Section 4

Aelurostrongylus abstrusus

Common name: Cat lungworm (Metastrongyloidea).

Adult size: 14-15 mm in lungs.

Importance: Chronic cough and weight loss, pulmonary
consolidation; may be fatal.

Diagnosis: Larvae in fecal flotation, eggs or larvae in
sputum.

( Treatment: Fenbendazole, 20-50 mg/kg PO q 24h x

 

lod
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus Ivemectin 0.2 mgfkg SC q 24h x 3d or PO q 24h
xSd
Cae <> Levamisole, 40 mg/kg PO q 48 h x 6 d
Fig. 59a. Aelurostrongylus abstrusus prepatent period is
5-6 weeks.

Capillaria (Eucoleus) aerophila

Common name: Cat lingworm or bladderworm
a).

Adult size: 13-25 mm in lung (C. aerophila), C. plica

 

(Trichuroide:

in bladder. ©. (Anchotheca) putorii in stomach
Size of egg: 60 tm x 30 fm
Importance: Relatively nonpathogenic; may cause
coughing (C. aerophila).

 

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation in urine sediment or

, from bronchial swab.
Capillaria aerophila

“—~_ Be

Fig. 60a, Capillaria aerophila prepatent period is 40 days

Treatment: Fenbendazole, 100 mg/kg PO or 50 mg/kg
q24hx 10d

Paragonimus kellicotti

Common name: Lung fluke (Troglotrematidae).
Adult siz

 

8-10 mm in lungs.
290 pm x 50 jum.
Importance: Chronic respiratory diseases.

 

Size of eg

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation, sputum smear.
Treatment: Albendazole, 50-100 mg/kg PO q 24 h x
14-21 d
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24 h x 10-14 d
Praziquantel, 25 mg/kg PO q 24hx 3d

 

Paragonimus kellicotti

Fig, Gla. Paragoninus kellicotti prepatent period is 5-6
weeks.

56
Parasites of Cats

 

Fig. 59c, Aelurostrongylus abstrusus. Close up of the char-
acteristic kinky tail (arrow).

 

    

Fig. 60c. Capillaria aerophila.

 

 

Fig. 61b. Parugoninus kellicotti. Fig, 6 Ic. Paragonimus kellicotti, Note
Se prominent operculum (arrows).

SZ

 
Section 4

   

Taenia taeniaeformis

CS

Fig. 63a. Taenia taeniaeformis prepatent period is 36-42

days.

 

Dipylidium caninum

ig. 64a. Dipylidinn caninwn prepatent period is |
mnonth,

 

58

Spirometra sp.

Common name: Tapeworm (Taeniidae).

Adult size: 7-100 cm in small intestine.

Size of egg: 70 jum x 35 pum.

Importance: May cause diarrhea, secondary anemia,
and sparganosis.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation, segments in feces.

Treatment: Bunamidine, 25-50 mg/kg (600 mg maxi-
mum)

Praziquantel, 20-40 mg/kg PO or SC

Taenia taeniaeformis

Common name: Tapeworm (Taeniidae).

Adult size: 15-60 em in small intestine.

Size of egg: 50 pm x 50 pm.

Importance: Heavy infection can cause diarrhea or in-
testinal obstruction.

Diagnosis: Segments (proglottids) in feces or on hairs in
perianal region, eggs in fecal flotation, single geni-
tal pore per proglottid.

Treatment: Bunamidine, 25-50 mg/kg PO or SC,
Epsiprantel, 2.8 mg/kg PO; Kenbendazole, 50
mg/kg PO q 24 hx 3 ds Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg
PO q 24 h 3-5 d; Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg PO;
Praziquantel, 2.5-5 mg/kg PO or SC

Dipylidium caninum

Common name: Flea tapeworm (Dilepididae).

Adult: In small intestine.

Size of egg: 25 jum x 30 Jun in oblong packets of 20 or
fewer eggs. Egg packets are 200 x 150 jim.

Importance: Indicates the presence of fleas. Chronic en-
teritis, anal pruritus, vomiting, or nervous disor-
ders may result.

Diagnosis: Segments on feces or perianal region, eggs in
fecal flotation, two genital pores per proglottid.

‘Treatment: Bunamidine, 25-50 mg/kg PO;
Dichlorophene, 220 mg/kg PO; Epsiprantel, 2.8
mg/kg PO; Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24 h x
3d; Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg PO; Praziquantel,
2.5-5 mg/kg PO or SC

 
Parasites of Cats

 

Fig. 63b. Taenia taeniaeformis.
Fig, 63c. Taenia taeniaeformis.

    

Fig. 64b. Dipylidium caninum. Fig, 64c. Dipylidium canimun.

59
 

    
  
   
  
  
   
  
  

Fig. 65a. Toxoplasma gondii. Fig. 65b. Toxoplasma gondii oocysts.

Toxoplasma gondii

Common name: Toxo (Apicomplexa), a protozoan parasite.
Size of oocyst: 12.5 um x 11 pm in small intestine. Prepatent period is 3-10 days when tissue cysts are ingested and 18—44
days when oocysts are ingested. o
Importance: May cause transient diarrhea in cats; highly pathogenic to humans, especially the fetus in utero (first two.
trimesters); pathogenic to other animals.
Diagnosis: Oocysts in fecal flotation, pseudocysts in tissues. Pseudocyst in dogs is similar to Neospora caninum (see Du
and Lindsay, 1993) Note: Only, cats (Felidae) shed oocysts in feces.
Treatment: Sulfadiazin 5-60 msfke day divided i into 4 doses and pyrimethamine 1 mg/kg q 24h x 3 d, then 0.5 gl

 

 

    
   
 
  
   

Sarcocysitis sp.

®

 

 

Fig. 66a. Sarcocystis sp.
WB: OGa. Sarcocystis SP. Fig. 66b. Sarcocystis sp. oocyst and 5

sporocyst is one-half of the oocyst.
Sarcocystis sp. S

Common name: None (Apicomplexa), a protozoan parasite.

Size of oocyst: 18 tum x 15 um. Prepatent period is 8-33 days.

Importance: Not very pathogenic in cats, but can be pathogenic in sheep.

Diagnosis: Fecal flotation—see sporulated oocysts or sporocysts. Sporulated oocysts passed in c
mediate hosts for S. ovifelis. Pseudocyst (schizont, sarcocyst) in sheep muscles, especially ¢

Treatment: None needed.

Prevention: Do not feed cats raw meat.

 

60
Parasites of Cats

 

Fig. 67a. Isospora spp. Fig. 67b. Isospora felis oocysts.

Isospora spp.

Common name: Coccidia (Apicomplexa), a protozoan parasite.
‘st; Oocysts in small intestine. I. bigemina, 13 jum x 10 yun; I. felis, 42 ktm x 31 bm;

     
  

   
   

n. Prepatent period is 1 week.
Importance: Diarrhea in kittens; may be fatal.
Diagnosis: Oocysts in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Sulfadimethoxine (Albon), 55 mg/kg q 24h, then 27.5 mg/kg q 24h x5 d.
Amprolium, 60-100 mg/kg q 24h x 7 d. May not be palatable.

    

Giardia canis

 

; Fig. 68b. Giardia sp. trophozoite (arrow). (See also Figs.
Fig. 68a. Giardia sp. 30b and 30c.) :

Giardia canis

Common name: None (Mastigophora), a flagellated protozoan parasite.
Size of organism: Cyst, 10 jm x 18 yum; trophozoite 10 jum x 17 pum. Incubation period is 1 week. Trophozoites and cysts
in small and large intestine.
Importance: Diarrhea.
Diagnosis: Cysts or trophozoites in fecal flotation or direct smear (must use fresh fecal material).
Treatment: Furazolidone, 4 mg/kg PO q 12h x 5d
Metronidazole, 25 mg/kg PO q 12h x 5d
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg q 24h x 3d
Albendazole, 25 mg/kg q 12h x 2d

61
Section 4

External Parasites

Notoedres cati

Common name: Mange mite (Sarcoptidae).
Size of adult: 300-400 jum. Life cycle is 17 days.

Importance: Persistent pruritus and alopecia on face, ears, and neck. Humans develop pruritic papular rash.
Diagnosis: Deep skin scraping at edge of lesion. Mites have long nonjointed pedicels like Sarcoptes. Adults, nymphs, lar-

vae, eggs in dermal tissues.
Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC

Lime sulfur solution, 40 dip
Malathion, 0.5% dip

 

Notoedres cati

Fig. 69a. Notoedres cati.

 

Fig, 69c. Typical flea larva.

Table 18. Common external parasites of cats

 

Fig, 69d. Crenocephalides felis (adult female). Note eggs in

flea (arrows).

 

Cheyletiella blakeilparasitovorax
Ctenocephalides felis/canis
Cuterebra spp.

Demodex cati
Dermanyssus gallinae
Eutrombicula alfreddugesi
Felicola subrostratus
Lynxacarus radousky
Ornithonyssus sp.
Otodectes cynotis
Rbipicephalus sanguineus
Sarcoptes scabiei

(See Fig. 49)

Figs. 42, 69c, 69d)

Fig. 45)

Fig. 475 very rare in cats)

(From birds, see Fig. 195)

(Larval chiggers, see Figs. 52f and 52g)
(See Fig, 52c)

(Very rare)

(From rodents and birds, see Fig. 52e)
(See Fig. 48)

(See Fig. 50)

(See Fig. 46; uncommon in cats)

 
   
 

  

 

62

 

 

 
Bibliography
Ascarids and Hookworms
Blaghurn BL, Hendrix CM, Lindsay DS, et al.: Efficacy

of milbenmycin oxime against naturally acquired o1
experimentally induced Ancylostoma spp. and

 

Trichuris vilpis infections in dogs. Am J Vet Res

13-516, 1992.

Burke TM, Roberson EL: Fenbendazole treatment of
pregnant bitches to reduce parental and lactogenic

 

3;

infections of Toxocara canis and Ancylostoma can-
imon in pups. J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:987-990,
1983.

Burke TM, Roberson E!
transmission of Toa

Prenatal and lactational

 

  

ocara canis and /Ancylostoma
canimon: Experimental infection of the hitch before
pregnancy. Int J Parasitol 15:71-75, 1985.

Burke TM, Roberson
transmission of Toxocara canis and Ancylostoma

Prenatal and lactational

 

canimon: Experimental infection of the bitch at mid
pregnancy and at parturition. It J Parasitol
15:485-590, 1985.

Clapham PA: Pre-partum infestation of puppies with
Ancylostoma caninum. Vet Rec 74:754-755, 1962.

Cornelius LM, Roberson EL: Treatment of gastroin-
testinal parasitism. In Kirk RW (ed): Current
Veterinary Therapy 1X: Small Animal Practice,
Philadelphia, WB Saunders Co., 1986, pp 921-924.

Courtney CH, Sundlof SF: Veterinary Parasitic Drugs

 

 

 

1991, American Association of Veterinary
Parasitologists, A comprehensive compendium of
EDA-approved antiparasitic drugs, Publ $P96,

4 pages, 1991.

Dubey JP: Effect of fenhendazole on Toxocara canis

University of Florida,

 

larvae in tissues of infected dogs. Am J Vet Res
40:698-699, 1979.

Egerton JR, Eary CH, Suhayda D: Titration studies of
ivermectin against experimental Ancylostoma can-
imum and Uncinaria stenocephala intections. Am |
Vet Res 46:1057-1059, 1985.

Georgi JR, Lejamhre LE, Ratcliffe LH: Ancylostoma
caninum burden in relationship to erythrocyte loss

205-1211, 1969.

Hayes FA, McDaniel FIT: An evaluation of piperazine

 

in dogs. J Parasitol 55

citrate for preventing prenatal infections with the
common dog ascarid (Toxocara canis). | Aim Vet
Med Assoc 134:565-567, 1959.

Kirkpartrick CE, Megella CG: Use of ivermectin in treat-
ment of Aelurostrongylus abstrusus and Toxocara
cati infections in a cat. J Ai Vet Med Assoc
190:1309-1310, 1987.

Mark DL: Survival of Ancylostoma canintn on bare
ground, pea gravel, and concrete. Am J Vet Res

63

Parasites of Cats

36:1803-1807, 1975.

Marmor M, Glickman L, Shoffer F, et al. Toxocara ca-
nis infection of children: Epidemiologic and neu-
ropsy‘chologic findings. Ar J Public Health
77:54-559, 1987.

McTier TL, Shanks DJ, Wren JA, et al
safety of selamectin against experimentally induced

  

 

ficacy and

and naturally acquired infections of Toxocara cati
and Aneylostoma tubaeforme in cats, Vet Parasitol
91:311-319, 2000.

McTier TL, Siedek EMI, Clemence RG, et al: Etficacy
of sclamectin against experimentally induced and

   

naturally occurring ascarid (Toxveara canis and
Toxascaris leonina) infections in dogs. Vet Parasitol
91:333-345, 2000.

Niamatali $, Bhopale V, Schad G:
mycin oxime against experimentally induced

    

“fficacy of milbe-

 

Aneylostoma stenoceplala infections of dogs. | Am
Vet Med Assoc 201:1385-1387, 1992.

Payne-Johnson M, Maitland TP, Sherington J, et ali:
Efficacy of selamectin administered topically to preg-
nant and lactating female dogs in the treatment and
prevention of adult roundworm (Toxocara canis) in-
fections and flea (Ctenoce phalides felis [elis) intesta
tions in the dams and the pups. Ver Parasitol
91:347-358, 2000.

Schacher JF: A contribution to the life history and lar-

 

val morphology of Toxocara canis. | Parasitol
43:599-6 12, 1957.

Scothorn MW, Koutz, FR, Groves HF: Prenatal
Toxocara canis infection in pups. | Ar Vet Med
Assoc 145:45-48, 1965.

Six RH, Sture GH, Thomas CA, et al: Efficacy and
safety of selamectin against gastrointestinal nema-

 

todes in cats presented as veterinary patients. Ver
Parasitol 91:321-331, 2000.

Sprent JEA: The life history and development of
Toxocara cati (Schrank 1788) in the domestic cat.

4-78, 1956.

Sprent JFA: Post-parturient infection of the hitch with
Toxocara canis. | Parasitol 47:284, 1961.

Vinayak VK, Gupta NK, Chopra AK, et al: Efficacies
of vaccines against canine hookworm disease.
Parasitology 82:375-382, 1981.

 

Parasitology 46

Heartivorms

Atkins CE, DeFrancesco TC, Coats JR, Sidley JA,
Keene BW: Heartworm infection in cats: 50 cases
(1985-1997). | Am Vet Med Assoc 217. 358,
2000.

Bauman PM, Otto GF: The relative number of microti-
lariae of Dirofilaria imunitis and Dipetalonema re-

 

conditum in naturally infected dogs. J Am Anim

XX
CL

Section 4

Hosp Assoc 10:379-382, 1974.

Blair LS, Camphell WC: Elficacy of ivermectin against
Dirofilaria immitis larvae in dogs 31, 60, and 90

41:2108, 1980.

Blair LS, Malatesta PL, Ewanciw DV: Dose-response

 

days after infection. Amr J Vet Res

study of ivermectin against Dirofilaria immitis mi-
crofilariae in dogs with naturally acquired infections.
Am | Vet Res 44:476-477, 1983.

Boy MG, Six RH, Thomas CA, et a
safety of sclamectin against fleas and heartworms in

 

: Efficacy and

dogs and cats presented as veterinary patients in
North America. Vet Parasitol 91 250, 2000.
Christensen BM, Hollander AL: Effect of tenaperature

 

on vector-parasite relationships of Aedes trivitattus
and Dirofilaria immitis. Proceedings of the
Helminthological Society of Washington

45:1 15-119, 1978.

Church EM, Georgi JR, Robson DS: Analysis of the
microfilarial periodicity of Dirofilaria immitis,
Cornell Vet 55:333-346, 1976.

Grieve RB, Glickman LT, Bater AK, et al
Dirofilaria immitis infection in a hyperenzootic area:

 

Canine

 

Examination by parasitologic findings at necropsy
and by serodiagnostic methods. Amz J Vet Res
47:329-332, 1986.

Holmes RA: Feline heartworm disease. Small Animal
Parasitology 15:687-695, 1993.

Jackson RF: Surgical treatment of heartworm disease.
Am Vet Med Assoc 154:383-384, 1969.

Kotani T, Powers KG: Developmental stages of
Dirofilaria immitis in the dog. Am J Vet Res
43:2199-2206, 1982.

Lewis RE: Radiographic findings in feline dirofilariasis.
In Otto GE (ed):
Symposium ‘86, Washington, DC, American
Heartworm Society, 1986, pp. 155-158.

McCall JW, MeTier TL, Ryan WG, et al.: Evaluation of
ivermectin and milhemycin oxime efficacy against

 

 

Proceedings of the Heartworm

Dirofilaria immnitis infections of three or four
months’ duration in dogs. Am J Vet Res
57:11 89-1192, 1996.

MeTier TL, Shanks DJ, Warston P, et al Prevention of
experimentally induced heartworm (Dirofilaria inn-
mitis) infection in dogs and cats with a single topical
application of selamectin. Vet Parasitol 91:259-268,
2000.

Merrill JR, Otis J, Logan WD, ct al.: The dog heart-
worm (Dirofilaria immitis) in man. | Am Med Assoc
243:1066-1068, 1980.

Otto GE, Jachowski LA: Mosquitoes and canine heart-
worm disease. In Otto GE (ed): Proceedings of the
Heartworm Symposium ‘80. Edwardsville, Kansas,
Veterinary Medicine Publishing Co., 1981, pp.

17-32.

  

64

Otto GE, Jackson RF, Bauman PML, et al.: Variability in

the ratio between the numbers of microfilariae and
adult heartworms. | Ani Vet Med Assoc
168:605-607, 1976.

Paul AJ, Todd KS, Sundberg JP, et al: Efficacy of iver-

meetin against Dirofilaria immitis larvae in dogs 30

 

and 45 clays after induced infection. Am] Vet Res
47:883-884, 1986.

Pulliam JD,
ivermectin toxicity in collies. Vet Med 6:33-40,
1985.

Snyder PS, Levy JK, Salute ME, et al: Performance of

 

ward RD, Henry RT, et al.: Investigating

serologic tests used to detect heartworm infection in
cats, | Am Vet Med Assoc 216:693-700, 2000.
Taylor AER: The development of Dirofilaria immitis in
the mosquito Aedes aegypti. | Helminthol 34:27-38,
1960.
Whitcley HE: Your diagnostic protocol for Dirofilaria
immitis infection in dogs. Vet Med 8:328-345, 1988.

Miscellaneous Parasites and Drugs 1 Dogs and
Cats

Anderson DL, Roberson EL: Activity of ivermectin
against canine intestinal helminths, Ant | Vet Res
43:1681-168.3, 1982.

Anderson FL, Condor GA, Marsland WP: Efficacy of
injectable and tablet formulations of praziquantel
against mature Eehinococens gramulosus. Am | Vet
Res 39:1861-1862; 15:256-260, 1978.

Anderson WI, Georgi ME, Car BD: Pancreatic atrophy
and fibrosis associated with Erytrema procyonis in
a domestic cat. Vet Ree 120 236, 1987.

August JR, Powers RD, Bailey WS, et al.: Filaroides
hirthi in a dog: Fatal hyperinfection suggestive of au-
toinfection. | Am Vet Med Assoc 176:33 1-334,
1980.

Bauer C, Gey A: Efficacy of six anthelmintics against

 

luminal stages of Baylisascaris procyonis in naturally
infected raccoons (Procyon lotor). Vet Parasitol
60:155-159, 1995.

Beal MW, Poppenga RH, Birdsall WJ, Hughes D:
Respiratory failure attributable to moxidectin intoxi-
cation ina dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:1 813+
1817, 1999.

Blagburn BL, Hendrix CM, Lindsay DS, Vaughan JL
Anthelminthic efficacy of ivermectin in naturally
parasitized cats. Am J Vet Res 48:670-672, 1987.

Bowman DD, Frongillo MK, Johnson RG, et al.:
Evaluation of praziquantel for treatment of experi-
mentally induced paragonimiasis in dogs and cats.
Am | Vet Res 52:68-71, 1991.

Burke TM, Roberson EL: Critical studies of fenbenda-
zole suspension (10%) against naturally occurring
helminth infections in dogs. Am | Vet Res
39:987-990, 1983

Burke TM, Roberson EL: Use of fenbendazole suspen-
sion (10%) against experimental infections of

 

‘Toxocara canis and Ancylostoma caninum in beagle
pups. Am J Vet Res 40:552-554, 1979.

Campbell WC (ed): Ivermectin and Abamectin. New
York, Springer-Verlag, 1989.

Clarkson MJ, Owen LN: The species of Trichuris in the
domestic cat. | Helminthol 34:319-322, 1960.

Corwin RM, Pratt SE, McCurdy HD: Anthelmintic ef-
fect of febantel/praziquantel paste in dogs and cats.
Am J Vet Res 45:154-155, 1984.

Corwin RM, Green SP, Keefe TJ: Dose titration and
confirmation tests for determination of cesticidal ef-
ficacy of epsiprantel in dogs. Am | Vet Res
50:1076-1077, 1989.

Dubey JP, Miller TB, Sharma SP: Fenbendazole for
treatment of Paragonimus kellicotti infection in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 174:835-837, 1979.

Dunsmore JD, Spratt DM: The life history of Filaroides
osleri in wild and domestic canids in Australia. Vet
Parasitol 5:275-286, 1979.

Foreyt WJ, Gorham JR: Evaluation of praziquantel
against induced Nanophyetus salmincola infections
in coyotes and dogs. Am J Vet Res 49:563-565,
1988

Fox $M, Burns J, Hawkins J: Spirocercosis in dogs.
Compend Cont Ed 10:807-822, 1988.

Georgi JR, Georgi ME, Gahnestock GR, et al.:
Transmission and control of Filaroides birthi lung-
worm infection in dogs. Am J Vet Res 40:829-831,
1979.

Hargis AM, Prieur DJ, Blanchard JL: Prevalence, le-
sions and differential diagnosis of Ollulams tricus-
pis infection in cats. Vet Pathol 20:71-79, 1983

Hollins JD, Marlow BP,
equine movidectin in dogs. Vet Ree 147:227-228,
2000.

Kirkpatrick CE.
Treatment with praziquantel. J Am Vet Med Assoc
187:75-76, 1985.

Lynn RC: Antiparasitic drugs. In Bowman DD (ed):

Hatherell PJ; Ingestion of

Shelly EA: Paragonimiasis in a dog:

 

 

Georgis’ Parastiology [or Veterinarians. 7* edition,
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1999, pp. 235-
283.

Paul AJ, Tranquilli WJ, Hutchens DE: Safety of mox-
idectin in avermectin-sensitive collies. Am J Fet Res
6 1:428-483, 2000.

Poole JB, Dooley KL, Rollins LD: Efficacy of
niclosamide for the removal of tapeworms
(Dipyliditun caninum and Taenia pisiformis) from
dogs. JAVMA 159:78-80, 1971.

Reinemeyer CR, DeNovo RC: Evaluation of the effica-

65

Parasites of Cats

cy and safety of two formulations of pyrantel
pamoate in cats. Am J Vet Res 51:932-934, 1990.

Roberson EL, Burke TM: Evaluation of a granulated
fenbendazole (22.2%) against induced and naturally
occurring helminth infections in cats. vn | Vet Res
41:149-1502, 1980.

Roberson EL, Burke TM: Evaluation of granulated fen-
bendazole as a treatment for helminth infections in
dogs. J Aim Vet Med Assoc 180:53-55, 1982.

Stokol ‘f, Randolph JF, Nachbar $, et al: Development

 

of bone marrow toxicosis after albendazole adminis-
tration in a dog and cat. J Am Vet Med Assuc
210:1753-1756, 1997.

Thomas H, Gonnert R: The efficacy of praziquantel
against cestodes in cats dogs, and sheep. Res Vet Sci
24:20-25, 1978.

Verster A: A taxonomic revision of the genus Taevia

 

(Linnaeus, 1758). Onderstepoort J Vet Res 36:3-58.
1969.

Visco RJ, Corwin RM, Selby LA: Effect of age and sex
on the prevalence of intestinal parasitism in dogs. |
Am Vet Med Assoc 170:835-837, 1977

Yazwinski TA, Tilley W, Greenway
mectin in the treatment of artificially induced canine,

Efficacy of iwer-

 

mixed, gastrointestinal helminthiasis. Ver Med Sinall
Anim Clin 77:225-226, 1982

Protozoan Parasites

Abbitt B, Huey RL, Eugster AK, et al: Treatment of gi-
ardiasis in adult greyhounds using, ipronidazole-med-
icated water. J Amn Vet Mec! Assoc 188:67-69, 1986

Abdullahi SU, Sannusi A: Canine babesiosis. In Kirk
RW (ed): Veterinary Therapy IX. Small Animal
Practice. Philadelphia, WB. Saunders Co. 1986, pp.
1096-1098

Barr SC: American trypanosomiasis in dogs. Comp
Cont Edue Pract Vet 13:745-755, 1991

Barr SC, Bowman DD, Heller RL, Erb, HN: Efficacy of
albendazole against giardiasis in dogs. Am | Ver Res
54:926-928, 1993

Barr SC, Bowman DD, Heller R
dazole against giardiasis in dogs. Proc Aim Assoc Vet

 

 

‘fficacy of fenben-

Parasitol San Francisco, California, 1994.
Bemrick W]:
giardiasis. In Erlandsen SL, Meyer EA (eds: Giardia

 

ome perspectives on the transmission of

and Giardiasis: Biology, Pathogenesis. and
Epidemiology. New York, Plenum Press, L984. pp
379-400.

Benjamin MM, Lumb WV: Haemobartonella canis in-
fection in a dog. J Amt Vet Med Assoc 135:388-390,
1959.

Bennett M, Baxby D, Blundell N, ct al.
sis in the domestic cat. Vet Rec 116:73

 

“ryptosporidio-

74, 19S8S.

 

ad
wt
CL

Section 4

 

Blouin EK, Kocan AA, Glen BL, et al: Transmission of
Cytanxzoon felis (Kier, 1979) from bobeats, Felix
rufus (Schreber), to domestic cats by Dermacentor

. | Wild! Dis 20:241-242, 1984
Babesiosis. In Greene CE (ed):
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1990, pp. 796-803.

Craig 1M: Hepatozoonosis. In Greene CE (ed):

variabilis (Sa

    

Breitschwerdt

Infections Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1990, pp. 778-785.
Dubey JP: A review of Sarcocystis of domestic animals
and other coccidia of cats and dogs. | Ant Vet Med
Assoc 169:1061-1078, 1976
Dubey JP: Infectivity and pathogenicity of Toxoplasma
gondii for cats. | Parasitol $2:957-961, 1996.
Dubey JP: Reshedding of Toxoplasma oocysts by

 

chronically infected cats. Nature 262:213-314,
1976.

Dubey JP: Toxoplasma, Hammondia, Besnoitia,
Sarcocystis, and other tissue cyst-forming coccidia of
man and animals. In Kreir JP (eds): Parasitic
Protozoa. Volume 3. New York, Academic Press,
1977, pp. 101-237.

Dubey JP: Pathogenicity of Isospora ohioensis infection
in dogs. | Am Vet Med Assoc 173:192-197, 1978

Dubey JP Beattie CP: Toxoplasmosis of animals and

  

 

man. Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press, Inc., 1988.

Dubey JP, Carpenter JL, Speer CA, et a
nized fatal protozoan disease of dogs. | Am Vet Med
Assoc 192:1269-1285, 1988.

Dube
(ed): Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1990, pp. 835-846.

Dubey JP, Greene CE, Lappin MR: Toxoplasmosis and
Neosporosis. In Greene CE (ed): Infections Diseases
of the Dog and Cat. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders
Co., 1990, pp. 818-834.

Dubey JP, Hattel AL, Lindsay DS, et al.: Neonatal
Neospora caninum infection in dogs: Isolation of the

Newly recog:

 

Enteric coccidiosis. In Greene CE

 

P, Greene

   

causative agent and experimental transmission. J Ant
Vet Med Assoc 193: 1259-1263, 1988.

Dubey JP, Lindsay DS: Neosporosis. Parasitol Today
9:452-457, 1993.

Dubey JP, Speer CA, Fayer R: Sarcocystosis of Animals
and Man, Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press, Inc.,
1989.

Dunbar MR, Foreyt WJ; Prevention of coccidiosis in
domestic dogs and captive coyotes (Canis latrans)
with sulfadimethoxine-ormetoprin combination, Am
| Vet Res 46:1899-1902, 1985.

Farwell GE, LeGrand EK, Cobb CC
tions on Babesia gibsoni and Babesia canis infec-
tions in dogs. | Am Vet Med Assoc 180:507-S1 1,
1982.

 

linical observa-

 

66

 

yer R, Ungar BLP: Cryptosporiditun spp. and cryp-
tosporidiosis. Microbiol Rev 50:458-483, 1986.
Frenkel JK, Dubey JP: Rodents as vectors for feline
coccidia, Isospora felis and Isospora rivolta. | Infect
Dis 125:69-72, 1972
Frenkel JK, Smith DD:
on shedding of To:
Parasitol 68:85 1-85
Glenn BL, Stair EL:
Report of two cases in Oklahoma, with a review

 

 

   
 
 
 

nhibitory effects of monensin
oplasma oocysts by cats. J

» 1982.

Cytauxzoonosis in domestic cats:

  

 

 

and discussion of the disease. J Arm Vet Med Assoc
184:822-825, 1984.

Gookin JL, Riviere JE, Gilger BC, Papich MG: Acute
renal failure in four cats treated with paromomyicn.
| Am Vet Med Assoc 215:1821-1823, 1999.

Harvey JW:
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cut.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders Co., 1990, pp. 434-442.

Hay WH, Shell LG, Lindsay DS, Dubey JP: Diagnosis
and treatment of Neospora canimun infection of a
dog. | Am Vet Med Assoc 197:87-89, 1990.

Hill SL, Cheney JM, Taton-Allen GE, Reif JS, Bruns C,
Lappin MR: Prevalence of enteric zoonotic organ
isms in cats. | Aim Vet Med Assoc 216:687-692,
2000.

Kier AB: Cytauxzoonosis. In Greene CE (ed): Infections
Diseases of the Dog and Cat. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders Co., 1990, pp. 792-795.

Kirkpatrick CE: Enteric protozoal infections. In Greene
CE (ed): Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1990, pp. 804-814.

Kirkpatrick CE, Dubey JP, Goldschmidt MH, et al.:
Sarcocystis sp. in muscles of domestic cats. Vet
Pathol 23:88-90, 1986.

Kirkpatrick CE, Green GA, IV: Susceptibility of domes-
tic cats to infections with Giardia lamblia cysts and

Haemobartonellosis. In Greene CE (ed):

 

 

 

trophozoites from human sources. | Clin Microbiol
21:678-680, 1985.

Kirkpatrick CE, Laczak JP: Giardiasis in a cattery. |
Am Vet Med Assoc 187: 161-162, 1985.

Levine ND, Ivens V: The coccidian parasites (Protozou,
Apicomplexa) of carnivores. Illinois Biology
Monograph no. 51. Urbana, University of Illinois
Press, 1981.

Lindsay DS, Blagburn BL: Coccidial parasites of cats
and dogs. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet
13:759-765:1991.

Lindsay DS, Dubey JP, Dunean RB: Confirmation that
the dog is a definitive host for Neospora caninum.
Vet Parasitol 82:327,

Olson ME: Coccidiosis caused by Isospora obivensis-
like organisms in three dogs. Car Vet J 26:1 12-114,
1985.

Olson ME, Ceri H, Morck DW: Giardia vaccination.

 
Parasitol Today 16:213-217, 2000.

Pits RP, Twedt DC, Mallie KA: Comparison of duode-
nal aspiration with fecal flotation for diagnosis of gi-
ardiasis in dogs. | Am Vet Med Assoc
182:1210-1211, 1983.

Prestwood AK: Cryptosporidiosis. In Greene CE (ed):
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders .Co., 1990, pp. 847-853.

Roher DP, Anderson JE, Nielsen SW: Experimental
babesiosis in coyotes and coydogs. An J Vet Res
46:256-262, 1985.

Small E, Ristic M: Haemobartonellosis. In Holzworth J
(cd): Diseases of the Cat: Medicine and Surgery.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1987, pp. 30

Smart J: Amprolium for canine coccidiosis. Med Vet
Pract 52:41, 1971.

Swenson CL, Silverman J, Stromberg PC, et al.:
Visceral leishmaniasis in an English foxhound from
an Ohio research colony. J Am Vet Med Assoc
193:1089-1092, 1988.

Taboada J, Harvey JW, Levy MG, et al.: Seroprevalence
of babesiosis in greyhounds in Florida. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 200:47-50, 1992.

Upton SJ, Current WL: The species of Cryptosporidium
(Apicomplexa: Cryptosporidiidae) infecting mam-
mals. J Parasitol 71:625-629, 1985.

Woo PTK, Paterson WB: Giardia lamblia in children in
day care centres in southern Ontario, Canada, and

 

 

susceptibility of animals to G. lamblia. Trans R Soc
Trop Med Hyg 80:56-59, 1986.

Zajac AM: Giardiasis. Compend Continuing Ed
14:604-6 11, 1992.

Fleas

 

Arther RG, Cunningham J, Dorn H, et al:
imidacloprid for removal and control of fleas
(Ctenucephalides felis) on dogs. Am J Vet Res
58:848-850, 1997.

Baker NE, Farver TB: Failure of brewer's yeast as a re-

icacy of

pellant to fleas on dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
183:212-214, 1983.

Benton AH: Av Atlas of the Fleas of the Eastern United
States. Fredonia, New York, Marginal Media, 1980.

Blagburn BL, Vaughan JL, Lindsay DS, et al.: Efficacy
dosage titration of lufenuron against developmental
stages of fleas (Ctenocepblides felis felis) in cats. Am
I Vet Res 55:98-101, 1994.

Cunningham J, Everett R: Efficacy of imidacloprid on
large dogs. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 19:28, 1997.

Dryden MW, Long GR, Gaafar $M: Effects of ultrason-
ic collars on Ctenocephalides felis on cats. | Am Vet
Med Assoc 195:1717-1718, 1989,

Halliwell REW: Factors in the development of flea-bite

 

67

Parasites of Cats

allergy. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 79:1273-1278,
1984.

Hink WE, Fee BJ: Toxicity of d-Limonene, the major
component of citrus peel oil, to all life stages of the

 

cat flea, Ctenocephalides felis (Siphonoptera:
Pulicidae)..| Med Entomol 23:400-404, 1986.

MacDonald JM, Miller VA: Parasiticide therapy in
small animal dermatology. In Kirk RW (ed): Current
Veterinary Therapy IX. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders
Co., 1986.

MeTier TL, Shanks DJ, Jernigan AD: Evaluation of the
effects of selamectin against adult and immature
stages of fleas (Ctenocepbulides felis felis) on dogs
and cats. Vet Parasitol 91:20 1-212, 2000.

Ritzhaupt LK, Rowan TG, Jones RL
ficacy of selamcctin, fipronil, and imidacloprid
against Crenocephalides felis in dogs. | Am Vet Med
Assoc 217:1669-1671, 2000.

Ritzhaupt LK, Rowan TG, Jones RI
ficacy of selamectin and fipronil against
Ctenocephalides felis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
217:1666-1668, 2000.

Shanks DJ, Rowan TG, Jones RL: Efficacy of se-
lamectin in the treatment and prevention of flea

valuation of ef-

 

valuation of ef-

 

(Clenocephalides felis felis) infestations on dogs and
cats housed in simulated home environment. Ver
Parasitol 91;:213-222, 2000.

Mites

Alexander MM, Ihrke Pk: Cheyletiella dermatitis in
small animal practice: A review. Calif Vet
36(3):9-12, 1982.

Alrian LG, Morgan MS, Rapp CM, Vyszenski-Moher
DL: Some effects of sarcoptic mange on dogs. |
Parasitol 81:698-702, 1995.

Auger P, Nantel J, Meunier N, et al:
caused by Dermanyssus gallinae de Geer: An in-hos-
pital outbreak. Can Med Assoc J 120:700-703,
1979.

Batey RG, Thompson RCA: Demodectic mange in a
cat. Aust Vet | 57:49, 1981.

Bowman DD, Fogelson ML, Carbone LG: Effect of
ivermectin on the control of car mites (Psoroptes cu-
nicufi) in naturally infested rabbits. Ai Vet Med

105-109, 1992.

kin acariasis

 

 

Assoc 5

Cannon RW: Amitraz in treatment of canine demodico-
sis. Mod Vet Pract 64:899-900, 1983.

Folz SD: Demodicosis (Denodex canis). Compend
Continuing Ed 5:116-124, 1983.

Folz SD, Kakuk TJ, Henke CL, et al.: Clinical evalua-
tion of amitraz as a treatment for canine demodico-
sis. Vet Parasitol 16:335-341, 1984.

Folz SD, Kakuk TJ, Henke CL, et al.: Clinical evalua-

 

qtr
tL

Section 4

tion of amitraz for treatment of canine scabies. Mod
Vet Pract 65:597-600, 1984.
Greve JH, Gerrish RR: Fur mites (Lywxacarus) from
cats in Florida. Feline Pract 1 1(6):28-30, 1981.
Hutchinson MD, Jacobs DE, Fox MT, et a

 

 

Evaluation of flea control strategies using fipronil on
cats in a controlled simulated home environment.
Vet Ree 142:356-357, 1998.

Kunkle GA, Miller WH: Cheyletiella infestation in hu-
mans. Arch Dermatol (15: 1345, 1980.

Kwochka KW: Canine demodicosis. In Kirk RW (ed):
Current Veterinary Therapy IX. Philadelphia, WB.
Saunders Co., 1986.

MacDonald JM: Eetoparasites. In Kirk RW (ed):
Current Veterinary Therapy VILL Philadelphia, W.B.
Saunders Co., 1983.

Miller WH, Scott DW, Wellington JR, et al.: Clinical ef-
ficacy of milbemycin oxime in the treatment of gen-
eralized demodicosis in adult dogs. J Am Ver Med
Assoc 204:1426-1429, 1993.

Nuttall ‘{], French AT, Cheetham HC, et al: ‘Treatment
of Trombicula autunmalis infestation in dogs and

 

cats with a 0.25 percent fipronil pump spray. J Small
Anim Pract 39:237-239, 1998.

Paradis M: New approaches to the treatment of canine
demodicosis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
29:1425-1436, 1999.

Scheidt VJ, Medleau L, Seward RI, et al.: An evalua-
tion of ivermectin in the treatment of sarcoptic
mange in dogs. An J Vet Res 45:1201-1202, 1984.

Scott DW, Walton DK:
amitraz and ivermectin for the treatment of general-

 

 

xperiences with the use of

ized demodicosis in dogs. | Ant Anim Hosp Assoc
21:535-541, 1985.

Shanks DJ, MeTier TL, Rowan TG, et al: The efficacy
of selamectin in the treatment of naturally acquired
aural infestations of Otodectes cynotis on dogs and
cats. Vet Parasitol 91:283-290, 2000.

Shaw SE, Foster AP: Treatment of canine adult-onset
demodicosis. Aust Vet | 78:243-244, 2000.

Shelley ED, Shelley WB, Pula JF, et al.: The diagnostic
challenge of non-bur rowing mite bites Cheyletiella
yasguri. | Am Med Assoc 251:2690-2691, 1984.

Shipstone M: Generalised demodicosis in dogs, clinical
perspective. Ast Vet | 78:240-242, 2000.

Six R, Clemence RG, Thomas CA, et al.: Efficacy and
safety of selamectin against Sarcoptes scabiei on

 

68

dogs and Otodectes cynotis on dogs and cats pre-
sented as veterinary patients. Vet Parasitol
91:291-309, 2000.

Wagner R, Wendlberger U: Field efficacy of moxidectin
in dogs and rabbits naturally infested by Sacroptes
spp.. Demodex spp., and Psoroptes spp. mites. Vet
Parasitol 93:149-158, 2000.

White SL, Stannard Ac\; nine demodicosis. In Kirk
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VII.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co, 198.

Yazwinski TA, Pote L, Tilley W, et al:
mectin against Sarcoptes scabiei and Otodectes

 

 

 

fficacy of iver-

cynotis infestations of dogs. Vet Med Small Anim
Clin 76:1749-175 1, 1981.

Ticks

Anderson JF: Epizootiology of Borrelia in Ixodes tick
vectors and reservoir hosts, Rev Infect Dis II (Suppl
6):1451-1459, 1989,

Appel, MIG: Lyme disease in dogs and cats. Compend
Continuing Education 12:6 17-626, 1990.

Bowman DD, Giovengo SL: Identification of adult and
nymphal ticks. Ver Tech 12:505-509, 1991,

Eng TR, Wilson ML, Spielman A, ct al: Greater risk of
Borrelia burgdorferi infection in dogs than in peo-
ple. J Infect Dis 158:1410-1411, 1988.

Estrada-Pena A, Ascher F: Comparison of an amitraz-
impregnated collar with topical administration of
fipronil for prevention of experimental and natural
infestations by the brown dog tick (Rhipicephalus
sanguineus). | Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1799-17803,
1999.

Jernigan AD, MeTier ‘IL, Chieffo C,et al: Efficacy of

sclamectin against experimentally induced tick
(Rbipicephalus sanguinens and Dermacentor vari-
abilis) infestations on dogs. Vet Parasitol
91:359-375, 2000.

Magnarelli LA, Anderson JF: Ticks and biting insects
infected with the etiologic agent of Lyme disease,
Borrelia burgdorferi. | Clin Microbiol
26:1482-1486, 1988.

Spielman A, Clifford CM, Piesman J, Corwin MD:
Human babesiosis on Nantucket Island, USA:

 

Description of veetor Ixodes dammini. J Med
Entomol 15:218-232, 1979.
Section 5

PARASITES OF CATTLE, SHEEP, AND GOATS

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts in Cattle

 

 

RELATIVE SIZES OF
BOVINE PARASITE EGGS

 

 

 

J
Strongyloides
papillosus
50x 22 ym

 

60ym

        
   

  

SY ww
Haemonchus Ostertagia sp. Tricho- Bunostomum sp. Cooperia sp.

contortus 80x 45m _ strongylus sp. g5 x 50 77x34
um x 34m
80x 45 ym 85x 40um ee
x 30m
Cryptosporidium
Dictyocaulus ©

 

viviparus larva 6 um
Eimeria zurnii

         

AQq

 

 

18 x [5m
Trichuris ovis
75 x 35m
E. auburnensis Eimeria bovis 50m Sa
40 x 24m 28 x20 ym 50um Fasciola hepatica
140 x 8Oum

Fig. 70. Common parasite eggs and oocysts found in cattle feces.
Coccidia in Cattle
Table 19, Major species of coccidia of cattle
Species Average size (um) Prepatent Period
Eimeria bukidnonensis 44 x 32 15-17 days
Eimeria aubernensis 39x 23 18-20 days
Eimeria bovis 28x20 15-20 days
Eimeria cylindrica 23x 14 11 days
Eimeria alabamensis 19x 13 7 days
Eimeria zurnii 18 x 16 15-17 days
Eimeria ellipsoidalis 17x 13 8-13 days

 

69
ot4

Section 5

Location of Major Parasites in Cattle

Ectoparasites

  
  
   
  
 
  
  
  
 

 

Lice Haematopinus Mies  Sarcoptes
Linognathus Psoroptes
Solenopotes Chorioptes
Damatinia Demodex

Ticks Dermacentor Flies Stomoxys
Haemaphysalis Siphona
Ixodes Musca
Otobius (in ear)

 

Cecum & Colon
Trichuris

Oesophagostomum

‘Small Intestine

Trichostrongylus

Cooperia
Nematodirus

Paramphistomum {

Bunostomum
Strongyloides
Moniezia
Eimeria spp.
Cryptosporidium

Fig. 71. Locations of the major parasites found in cattle.

Zoonotic Diseases in Cattle

Table 20. Major zoonotic diseases associated with cattle
Organism Disease
Protozoa

Sarcocystis hominis Intestinal sarcosporidiosis

  

rypanosoma rbodesiense African trypanosomiasis

 

Cryptosporidium sp. Cryptosporidiosis

Nematodes

Thelazia spp. Thelaziasis
Trichostrongylus spp. Trichostrongyliasis
Trematodes

Fasciola hepatica Fascioliasis

Cestodes

Taenia saginata Tacniasis

70

 
   
 

Parasites of Cattle

Muscle |

Taenia saginata (Cysticercus)
Sarcocystis (Sarcocyst)

  
   
  

Thelazia

 
 

Connective Tissue

  
    

‘Onchocerca
Hypoderma (Larva)

 
  
 

Dietycaulus viviparus

Abomasum

Haemonochus
Ostertagia
Trichostrongylus

 

viethod of Infection

Ingestion of raw beef
Bite of tsetse fly
Ingestion of oocysts

Ocular contact with fly vector
Ingestion of larvae

Ingestion of metacercariae

Ingestion of cysticerci in meat
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

SARCOCYSTIS LIFE CYCLE

'S. bovicanis

»

|—S. bovihominis

   

 

Taenia saginata
“€@
Fig. 72a. Life cycle of Tacnia saginata. e
Sporocysts

in feces

Fig, 72b. Life cycle of Sarcocystis beminis. —=

S. bowicanis is S. cruzi Sorcocysis

S. bowifelis is S. hirsuta
S. bovibominis is S. hominis i

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts in Sheep and Goats

 

 

 

RELATIVE SIZES OF
SHEEP PARASITE EGGS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Eimeria species:
m Moniezia expansa
50-60 pm

    

E. crandallis E. ahsata
22 x 19pm 33 x24 pm
Strongyloides
; papillosus
E. intricata 50x 22m
© 47 x 32m
E parva E. ovina
16 x 14m 27 x18ym

 

Trichuris ovis

     

Ly 75 x 35pm 5
Haemonchus Ostertagia sp. Tricho- Nematodirus spathiger
contortus 80x 45ym___strongylus sp. 50m 200 x 90)m
80x 45m
85x 40m 50pm

Fig. 73. Common parasite eggs and oocysts found in sheep feces.

71

aay
Section 5

Coccidia in Sheep and Goats

  

le E. crandallis
A

E. ahsata ( iy

E. pallida

 

   

E. faurei

 

E. granulosa E. bakuensis (ovina)

40 pm

Fig. 74. Sporulated Eimeria species found in sheep.

 

E. arlonigi E. caprovina
E. caprina

   

E. jolchijevi

 

E. ninakohlyakimovae
E. christenseni
30 um

Fig. 75. Sporulated Eimeria species found in goats.

72
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Table 21. Major species of coccidia in sheep and goats

Species Size (jun) Prepatent Period _ Species Size (jim) Prepatent Period
Sheep Goats
neria intricata 47X32 20-27 days

  

 

neria _ christenseni 38 x 25 14-23 days

 

Eimeria absata 33 x24 18-21 days Eimeria caprina 32x23 17-20 days
Eimeria faurei 29x21 12-14 days Eimeria arloingi 27x 18 19 days
Eimeria ovina 29x21 19 days. Eimeria hirci 23x 19 15-20 days
Eimeria ovinoidalis 23 x 18 9-15 days Eimeria ninakoblyakimovae 23 x 18 10-13 days
neria crandallis 22x 19 15-20 days Eimeria aligevi 16x14 7-12 days

 

Eimeria parva 16x14 11-15 days

Location of Major Parasites in Sheep and Goats

Parasites of Sheep

 

 

[ Ectoparasites l Brain |

           
      
   
 
 
  
      
     
   
    
 

Taenia ovis

Lice - Damatinia (Cysticercus)
Taenia multiceps (Coenurus)

Linognathus Toxoplasma

Ked + Metophagus Taenia hydatigena (Cysticercus) (Pseudocyst)

Strike - Lucilia

Nasal Sinus |
Flies a

Calliphora
estrus ovis
Chrysomya

Mites - Chorioptes

Dictyocaulus
Muellerius
Hydatid cyst

Cecum & Colon

Oesophagostomum
Chabertia
Trichuris

‘Small Intestine

Fasciola

Thysanosoma

Trichostrongylus

Cooperia 7
Nematodirus | Abomasum
Bunostomum Paramphistomum Haemonchus
Strongyloides Ostertagia

Moniezia Trichostrongylus

 

76. Locations of the major parasites found in sheep. (Most of these are also in goats.)

73

AAq
Sia

Section 5

     
  
    
  
  

EIMERIA

SCHIZONTS

SPOROZOITES.

P-MICROGAMETES (O'O'O...)

. MACROGAMETE (9)

ZYGOTE

  
 
 
  

INGESTED ( LEAVES HOST

@

eB

Fig. 77. Life cycle of Eimeria spp. in sheep and other ruminants.

Zoonotic Diseases in Sheep and Goats

Table 22. Major zoonotic diseases associated with sheep

 

 

Organism Disease Method of Infection
Protozoa
Toxoplasma gondii Toxoplasmosis Ingestion of raw meat
Cryptosporidium sp. Cryptosporidiosis Ingestion of oocysts
Sarcocystis bovibominis Diarrhea Ingestion of raw meat
Nematodes
Strongyloides spp. Strongyloidiasis Ingestion of larvae
Trichostrongylus spp. Trichostrongyliasis Ingestion of larvae
Trematodes
Fasciola hepatica Fascioliasis Ingestion of metacercariae
Arthropods
Calliphora spp. Myiasis Contact with adult flies
Oestrus ovis Myiasis Contact with adult flies

 

74
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Fig. 79. Cryptosporidiin spp. (Ooevsts in feces.)

 

Toxoplasma gondii

Fig. 78. Toxoplasma gondii. (Pscudocyst in the brain of a
sheep).

    
   
    
 
    

Schizonts

7 Meets

Schizonts

ne)
ne

Fig. 80. Life cycle of Cryptosporidium parvum.

eve of Host -

 

75
 

Section 5

 

Fig. 81a. Histologic section of lamb small intestine with numerous Cryptosporidium oocysts (arrows) imbedded in the brush

borders of the villi.

Neospora caninum

Common name: Neospora caninwn.

Size of pseudocyst: Usually <100 tm.

Importance: This parasite can cause abortions.
Liveborn calves may be underweight, weak, un-
able to stand, and may have neuromuscular signs.
Transplacental transmission occurs.

Diagnosis: Clinical signs and histologically. Pseudocysts
seen in neural tissue at necropsy.

Source of infection: Unknown.

Treatment: Treatment is experimental. Some coc-
cidiostats and coccidiocides may be helpful.

76

  
 

Fig. 81b. Neospora caninum pseudocyst in the brain of an.
aborted calf.
ZL

Drugs Used in Ruminants

Table 23. Efficacy of anthelmintics

 

gainst major internal parasites of cattle

 

 

zainst Adult Nematodes (%)

 

 

 

 

 

  

    

Drug Dose (mg/kg PO) Ostertagia —Haemonchus Trichostrongylus Cooperia Nematodirus Bunostomum Strongyloides Oesophagostomun
Albendazole 10.0 97-100 97-99 99-100, 97-100 87-100 100 — 100
Clorsulont 70 — _ — _ _ — — _
Coumaphos 26 80-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 — ~ _ _
Dorameetin 0.2 SCM 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 ~ 95-100 — 95-100
Eprinonwetin 0.5 Pour on 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100
Febantel 75 95-100 95-100 0-100 95-100 — — — —
Fenbendazole SAO 95-100 95-100. 95-100. 95-100. 95-100, 95-100. 80-100. 95-100
Ivermectin 0.2 $C 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 80-100 — _ 95-100
Levamisole 7-8 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 _ 95-100
Morantel 10 80-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 5-100 — 95-100
Moxidectin 0.5 Pour on 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-97 95-100 95-100 _ 95-100
Oxtenclazole 25 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 100 95-100 95-100
Oxibendazole 10 95-100. 80-100, 95-100, 95-100 80-100 95-100. 95-100. 95-100.
Phenothiazine 220-400, 80-100. 95-100 95-100 0-100. 0-100 0-100 _— 95-100.
Pyrantel 25 95-100 95-100 a 95-100. 95-100 — —_ _

 

Dash indicates insufficient data or not effective.
95-100% ¢
Sg 24hx7d.

Note: Lactating dairy cattle can be treated with eprinomectrin at 0.5 mg/kg as a pour on, 0.5 my/kg moxidectin as a pour on, coumaphos as a top

  

ctive against Fasciola hepatica, both immature and mature.

dressing on feed at 2 mg/kg for 6 consecutive days, fenbendazole at 5-10 mg/kg PO, or with morantel at 10 mg/kg PO (see Courtney and Sundlof, 1991).

aayq

syvory puv ‘daayg ‘a[11eD Jo sausvieg
82

Table 24.

 

:fficacy of anthelmintics against major internal parasites of sheep and goats

‘acy against Adult Parasites (%)

yit4a

 

 

 

 

 

Drug Dose(my/kg PO) Haemonchus Ostertagia Trichostrongylus Cooperia Nematodirus Bunostonunn Strongyloides — Chabertia _Moniezia
Albendazole 10 99-100 97-100. 99-100 99-100 99-100 _ - 100 100
Doramectin 0.2 _- — - = _ _ _ _ _
Febantel 5 95-100 95-100 95-100 - 95-100 95-100 95-100 _ —
Fenbendazole 10 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100. 95-100 95-100 — 80-100 85-95
Ivermectin 0.2 SC 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 — 95-100 95-100. _
Levamisole 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100. 60-85 95-100 _—
Morantel 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 _— — —
Oxfendazole 5 95-100 95-100 95-100. 100 95-100. _ — 95-100
Oxibendazole 10 95-100 95-100 0-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100
Pyrantel 25 95-100 _ 0-100 _ 95-100 _ _ _ _

 

Dash indicates not effective or insufficient data (see Courtney and Sundlof, 1991).

Note: Doramectin and ivermectin are similar

Table 25. Major anticoccidial drugs used in cattle

drugs.

Table 26. Major anticoccidial drugs used in sheep and goats

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

Drug Method Use Level Drug Method Use Level

Amprolium (prevention) In feeW/water 5 mg/kg x 21d Amprolium Water 50 my/kg of body weight q 24h

Amprolium (treatment) In feed/water 10 mg/kg x Sd x 21 dor 0.2% in feed

Aurcomycin-tetracycline (prevention) — In feed 35 wld x 28 d Decoquinate Feed 0.5 my/ky of body weight in feed

Decoquinate (prevention) In feed 0.5 mg/kg, x 28+ d Lasalocid Feed 30 /909 kg (ton) of feed

Lasalocid (prevention) In feed (15% active)/23 kg (50 Ib)sale

Monensin Feed 10-30 9/909 kg (ton) of feed

body weight) Sulfaguanidine Feed 0.2% concentration in feed

Monensin (prevention) In feed 1 9/30 kg feed Sulfamethazine Feed up to 0.5% concentration in feed
body weight)

Sulfaquinoxaline In water 13 mg/kg

Sulfamerazine In feed 65-130 mg/kg

 

§ uw01399
Table 27. Major drugs for control of es

Drug (Trade Name)

‘Organophosphates
Chlorfenvinphos (Supona)
Chlorpyrifos (Dursban)
Coumaphos (Co-Ral)

Crotoxyphos (Cyodrin)
Crufomate (Roulene)
Diazinon

Dichlorvos (Vapona)
Dimethoate (Cygon)
Dioxathion (Delnav)
Famphur (Warbex)
Fenchlorphos (Korlan-ronnel)
Fenthion (Tiguvon)

Malathion (Cythion)
Phosmet (Prolate)
Tetrachlorvinphos
(Rabon-stirophos)
Trichlorfon (Neguvon)

 

Carbamates
Carbaryl (Sevin)
Propoxur

Organochlorines
Lindane

 

Methoxychlor (Marlate)
Toxaphene

Diamidines
Amitraz
(Mitaban, Triatox, Bam,
Preyentic collars)

Miscellaneous™*
Cypermethrin (P) (Curatick)
Doramectin (Dectomax)
Eprinomectin (Ivomee

 

prine)

Fenvalerate(P) (Ectrin)
Ivermectin (Ilvomee)
Methoprene (IGR)

Moxidectin (Cydectin)
Pyrethrum

Permethrin (P) (Ectiban)(Expar)
Resmethrin (P)

Bacillus thuringiensis (B)

©4h = variable efficacy,

 

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

ernal parasites in ruminants
Parasites

Ticks, lice, flies, keds, mites
Ticks, lice
Fleas, flies, keds, lice, ticks, cartle grubs

Ticks, mites, lice, flies
Flies, lice, mites, ticks

Flies, lice, keds, ticks

Flies

Hlies

Flies, keds, lice, ticks

Flies, lice, cattle grubs

Flies, lice, mites, ticks

Cartle grubs, sheep nose bots,
lice, keds, blowflies

Fleas, flies, lice, keds, mites, ticks
Flies, lice, cattle grubs, ticks
Fleas, flies, lice, ticks

Cartle grubs, flies, lice, mites

Fleas, flies, lice, mites, ticks
Hlies

Flies, keds, lice, mites, ticks
Flies, keds, lice, mites, ticks
Flies, keds, lice, mites, ticks

Ticks, mites, lice +/-°

Ticks
Sucking lice, grubs, Psoroptes, Sarcoptes
Lice, horn flies, Sarcoptes,
Chorioptes. grubs
Flies, ticks
Lice, mites, cattle grubs
Flies
Lice, Chorioptes, Psuroptes
Flies, fleas, keds, lice
Flies, lice, mites, tick:
Ticks
Aquatic insect larvae

 

Application

Dip, spray

Dip, spray, pour on, dust, bac

Dip, spray, pour on, dust, bacl
feed additive

Dust, spray

Dip, spray, pour on

Dip, dust, spray

Resin granules, resin strips, spray

Spray

Dip, spray, back rubber

Pour on, spray

Dust, oral, spray, back rubber, pour on

Spray, pour on, spot on

 

rubber

 

rubber,

Dip, dust, spray
Spray
Dust, car tag, back rubber, spray

Pour on, oral, injectable, spray

Dip, dust, spray
Spray

Dust, spray, pour on, back rubber
Dust, spray, back rubber
Dip, dst, spray, back rubber

Dip, spray

Dip

SC or IM (0.2 meékg)
Pour on (0.5 mg/kg

 

Spray, car tags
Oral, injectable SC, IM (0.2 mg/kg)
Feed additive

Pour on

Spray

Dip, spray

Spray

Dried powder

©*Includes pyrethroids (P), insect growth regulators (IGR), bacteria (B), and others.
Note: For lactating dairy cattle, the following drugs are used: coumaphos, crotoxyphos, dichlorvos, eprinomectrin,

fenvalerate, malathion, methoprene, methoxychlor, permethrin, pyrethrins, and stirofos.

Read label directions carefully. The label is the most authoritative source of information.

79

aay
S44

Section 5

 

Haemonchus contortus

 

Fig. 82a. Haemonchus contortus (sheep) Hacmonehus pla-
cei (cattle) prepatent period is 17-21 days.

 

Ostertagia ostertagi /

“A

 

Fig. 83a. Ostertagia ostertagi (cattle) Teladorsagia circum
cincta (sheep) prepatent period is 16-23 days.

 

\ Trichostrongylus axei

 

Fig. 84a, Trichostrongylus axei prepatent period is 3
weeks.

Internal Parasites

Haemonchius contortus

Common name: Barber's pole oF wire worm (Trichostrongyloidea),

Adult size: 10-30 mm in abomasum. .

Size of egy: 80 ym x45 4m.

Importance: Acute anemia in lambs; bottle jaw,
weight loss in adults.

Diagnosis:

refrigeration, At necropsy; adults are found in abomasum.

death, chronic

 

‘ccal flotation; eggs do not larvate after 4-5 days of

‘Treatment: Drug resistance often develops
Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg IM or SC
Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC
Fenbendazole, 5 mg/kg PO
Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg PO (cattle)
Morantel tartrate, 9.7 mg/kg PO
Moxidectin, 0.5 my/kg pour on
Tetramisole, 15 mg/kg PO (for sheep, do not exceed total 600-

mg dosage)

Ostertagia ostertagi

 

Jommon name: Brown stomach worm (Trichostrongyloidea).
Adult size: 6-10 mm in abomasum.
Size of egg: 80 yum x 45 pum,

 

Importance: Larvae destroy gastric glands of cattle; may cause

severe diarrhea and wei

 

ht loss. Type I: Larvae mature and
adults produce eggs. Pre-type Il: Not clinically apparent.

Fourth-stage larvac are inhibited in gastric glands. Type Hs
Maturation of inhibited larvae with weight loss, diarth

 

anorexia, anemia, no fever, often no eggs in feces.

‘ecal floration; plasma pepsinogen levels may be in-

 

Diagnos
creased. At necropsy, adults and nodular lesions are found
in abomasum.

Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO kills Type I

Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg IM or SC

Eprinomeetrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

Fenbendazole, 5 mg/kg PO kills Type Hat 10 mgskg,
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC kills ‘Type Il

Morantel tartrate, 9.7 mg/kg PO

Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg, pour on kills Type I

Trichostrongylus axei

Common name: Bankrupt worm or small stomach worm
(Trichostrongy‘loidea).
Adult size: 4-8 mm in abomasum.
Size of egg: 80 yum x 40 jm.
Importance: In cattle, sheep, goats there is diarrhea, dehydration,
bottle jay, and emaciation in stressed animals.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. At necropsy, adults (4-6 mm)
in abomasum,
Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Dorameetin, 0.2 mg/kg IM or SC
Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Fenbendavole, Spring, 5 mg/kg PO
in, Fall, 0.2 mg/kg SC
Morantel tartrate, 9.7 mg/kg PO
Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

 

Iverme

 
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

. Haemonchus contortus .

Fig. 84c. Trichostrongylus axei.

 
Section 5

Nematodirus spp.

Common name: Thin-necked intestinal worm
(Trichostrogyloidea).

Adult size: 10-25 mm in small intestine. Sheep: N. fili-
collis, N. battus. N. spathiger; cattle: N. belve-

 

dann
Size of egg: N. filicollis 200 jum x 90 um; N. battus 175
yum x 75 pm.

   

Importance: Acute diarrhea in young animals; may be

 

fatal, especially N. battus.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. At necropsy, adults

 

|
\ uy are found in small intestine.

Nematodirus spp / Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg, PO
. Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg, pour on
= Fenbendazole, 5 mg/kg PO
ee, .
S Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC

Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg, PO
Morantel tartrate, 9.7 mg/kg, PO

 

Fig, 85a, Nematodirus spp. pre
days

arent period is 14-21

Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg. pour on

Strongyloides papillosus

Common name: Threadworm (Rhabditoidea ).
Adult size: 3-6 mm in small intestine.

 

Size of egg: 50 jim x 22 wm.

 

Importance: Cutaneous exposure in sheep may con-
tribute to foot rot, diarrhea in young animals;

transmammary transmission possible.

  
 

Diagnosis: Larvated eggs or larvae in fecal flotation.

 

Treatment: Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC

Oesophagostomum columbianun

Common name: Nodular worm (Strongyloidea).

Adult size: 14-22 mm in large intestine. Sheep and
goats: O. colmbiamun, O. venlosum; cattle: O.
radiatum.

80 um x 40 jun.

Nodular worm of sheep and cattle. May

  

Size of eg
Importance

 

cause diarrhea with subsequent fly strike in sheep.
Diagnosis:

 

gs in Fecal flotation. At necropsy, nodules
are seen in walls of small and large intestines and

 

adults are found in large intestine.

Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg, PO
\__ Oesophagostomum columbianum Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg IM or SC

™~

Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
— aD Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg, PO

Morantel tartrate, 9.7 mg/kg, PO

Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

 

Fig. 87a. Oesophagostomuin columbiarian prepatent peri-
od is 40 days.

82

 
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

 

   
 

Fig. 87c. Oesophagostonmm columbiarum.

 
Section 5

 

Trichostrongylus colubriformis

Fig. 8:
3 weeks.

Trichostrongylus colubriformis prepatent period is

 

 

— Cooperia spp.

“N

a

Fig. 89. Cooperia spp. prepatent period is 3 weeks.

 

Bunostomum spp.

SD)
WS)

X

“Soe,
EST

Fig. 90. Brnostomiun spp. prepatent period is 2 months.

84

Trichostrongylus colubriformis

Common name: Hair worm, black scour worm
(Trichostrongyioidea).

Adult size: 4-8 mm in small intestine.

 

Size of egg: 85 fm x 40 4m.
Importance: In sheep and goats, acute diarrhea in young;
chronic diarrhea in older animals. May cause bottle

jaw and severe reduction in growth.

 

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation, At necropsy, adults are
found in small intestine.
Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg, PO
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg IM or $C
Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Fenbendazole, 5 mg/kg PO
Levamisole, 7.5 mg/kg PO
Morantel tartrate, 9.7 mg/kg PO
Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

Cooperia spp.

Common name: Cattle bankrupt worm (Tricho-strongy-
loidea).
Adult size: 4-8 mm in small intestine. Cattle: C. pectinata,

C, punctata, ‘patulata, C. memasteri (surnelada);

 

    

sheep and goats: C. punctata, C. pectinata.

 

Size of egg: 77 jum x 34 pum.

Importance: In cattle, sheep, and goats, not highly patho-
genic; diarrhea, anorexia, depressed growth.
Synergistic with Ostertagia ostertagia.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. At necropsy, adults are

 

found in small intestine.
Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg, PO

Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg, IM or $C
Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Fenbendazole, 5 mg/kg, PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC
Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg PO
Morantel tartrate, 9.7 mg/kg, PO
Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

Bumostomum spp.

Common name: Hookworm (Trichostrongyloidea).

Adult size: 10-28 mm in small intestine. Cattle: B. phle-
botonun; Sheep: B. trigonocephalum.

Size of epg: 95 ym x 50 fm.

Importance: In cattle and sheep, anemia and diarrhea in
young animals, loss of weight, death.

 

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. At necropsy, adults are
found in small intestine.
‘Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg, IM or SC
Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Fenbendazole, 5 mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg $C
Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Table 28. Miscellancous Trichostrongyle parasites of ruminants that have similar “strong)

and other miscellaneous parasites

Cattle Strongyles
Bunostomum pblebotomum
Cooperia memasteri (surnabada)
Cooperia oncophora
Cooperia punctata
Cooperia pectinatia
Haemonchus placei
Oesophagostomum radiatinn
Oesophagestomum venulosum
Ostertagia ostertagia
Trichostrongylus axei
Trichostrongylus colubriformis

Sheep and Goat Strongyles
Bunostomum trigonocephalum
Chabertia ovina
Cooperia curticei
Cooperia pectinata
Cooperia punctata
Cooperia oncophora
Haemonchus contortus
Oesophagostomum columbianum
Oesophagostomum venulosum
Ostertagia lyrata
Teladorsagia cireumeineta
Teladorsagia trifurcata
Trichostrongylus axei
Trichostrongylus colubriformis
Trichostrongylus vitrinus
Trichostrongylus capricola

Other Miscellancous Nematodes Parasites

Cattle

Parafilaria bovicola

Sheep and Goats
Skrjabinema ovis

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Cattle hookworm
Cattle bankrupt worm
Cattle bankrupt worm
Cattle bankrupt worm
Cattle bankrupt worm
Barber's pole worm
Nodular worm
Nodular worm

Brown stomach worm
Bankrupt or hair worm
Hair worm

Hookworm
Large-mouthed bowel worm
Cooperid

Cooperid

Cooperid

Cooperid

Barber's pole worm
Nodular worm

Nodular worm

Brown stomach worm
Brown stomach worm
Brown stomach worm
Bankrupt or hair worm
Hair worm

Hair worm

Hair worm

Filarial worm

Pinworm

Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult

Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult

Adult

Adult

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

in

 

Je-type” eggs in feces,

small intestine
small intestine
small intestine
small intestine
small intestine
abomasum

large intestine
large intestine
abomasum

abomasum

small intestine

small intestine
colon

small intestine
small intestine
small intestine
small intestine
abomasum
large intestine
large intestine
abomasum
abomasum
abomasum
abomasum
small intestine
small intestine
small intestine

subcutancous tissue

eccum

 

85

aay
Section 5

Trichuris ovis

Common name: Whipworm (Irichuroidea).
2

 
 

 

Adule size: 2-3 mm in cecum and large intestine.

Size of egg: 75 tm x 35 um.

 

Importance: Rarely: pathogenic; overwhelming infee-
tions may cause fatal hemorrhage into ce
Diagnosis:

 

m.

 

‘gg in fecal flotation. At necropsy, adults
are found in cecum and large intestines.
Treatment: Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg IM or SC
Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Kenbendazole, 5 mg/kg, PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 me/ky SC

  

a Trichuris ovis 4

<i

Fig. 91a. Trichuris ovis prepatent period is 2 months.

Chabertia ovina

Common name: Large-mouth bowel worm
(Strongyloidea).

Adult size: 13-20 mm in large intestine.

Size of egg: 100-120 yum x 40-50 jun,

Importan

 

e: Occasionally causes severe anemia.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. At necropsy, adults
are found in colon.

Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO

Fenbendazole, 5 my/ky PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC

Capillaria sp.

Common name: Capillary worm (Trichuroidea).

Adult size: $-8 mm in small intestine.

Size of egg: 50 tm x 30 um.

Importance: Mostly nonpathogenic, but egg may be

confused with Trichuris spp.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.

Treatment: None tested.
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg IM or SC
Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg, pour on
Eenbendazole, 5 mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC

 

Capillaria sp.

- <P

Fig. 93a. Cupillaria sp. prepatent period is 6 weeks.

86
       

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

a
|b. Trichuris ovis. ig. 1c. Trichuris ovis.
Section 5

 

Fig. 94a. Dictyocaulus viviparus (cattle), Dictyocaulus [i-
laria (sheep) prepatent period is 4 weeks (22-25 days}.

Fig. 95a. Protostrongyl

 

stilesi (highorn sheep) prepatent period is 3 weeks.

 

. Muellerius capillaris

 

3)

Fig. 96a, Muellerins capillaris prepatent period is 5 weeks.

 

ufescens (sheep), P. rushiy P.

88

Dictyocaulus viviparus

Common name: Lungworm (Trichostrongyloidea).
Adult size

 

8m in lungs.
390-450 jum x 20-25 pm.
Importance: Young animals (acute form): cough,

Size of lary:

 

cyanosis, dyspnea, Adults (chronic form): cough,
dyspnea, lethargy.

 

Diagnosis: Bacrmann technique for larvae from feces:

characteristic lary cells, short
tail). Fecal flotation: larvated ova or some free

lar

 

: (many interstitial

 

 

ac in Feces. At necropsy, adult (3-5 em) in
passages of lung. Cattle: D. viviparns; sheep: D.
filaria.

Albendazole, 10 mg/kg, PO

Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg IM or SC

Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

me/kg PO

Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/l

 

‘Treatment

 

Fenbenclazole,

 

 

Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg, PO in early spring,
Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

Protostrongylus spp.

Common name: Bighorn sheep lungworm
(Metastrongyloidea).

Adult size: 10-20 mm in lungs.

Size of larva: 340-400 jum x 20 jum.

Importance: Predisposes to pneumonia in bighorn
shi

 

ransplacental transmission in bighorn

  

sheep, respiratory signs.
Diagnosis: Uncommon in domestic sheep. Baermann
technique for larvae from feces. Fiber optic endo-
scope to visualize adults.
‘Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 15 mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg, SC

Muellerius capillaris

 

Common name: Goat lungworm (Metastrongyloidea).
Adult size: 4-12 mm in lungs.
Size of larva: 300 jum x 15 yum.

Importan

 

y predispose to pneumonia.
Diagnosis: Baermann technique for larvae from fee
Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 15 mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC

 
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, an

    
   

    

Fig. 9Sb. Protostrongylus sp.

 

Fig. 96b. Muellerins capillaris. Fig. 96c. Muellerius capillaris. (Note kinky tail.)

89
144

 

Section 5

   

Fasciola hepatica

ay. 7

 

Fig. 98a, Moniezia benedeni (cattle), Moniesia expansa
(sheep) prepatent period is 40 days.

o-—_—->

Tritrichomonas foetus

 

J
Ly
u

Fig, 99a, Tritrichomonas foetus reproduces quickly.

   

90

Fasciola hepatica

Common name: Common liver fluke (Fasciolidae).
Adult size:
Size of egg:

3-4 cm in hepatic bile ducts.
140 jun x 80 jun.
Importance: Acute syndrome: hepatic trauma due to

 

 

migration may result in hepatitis and death.
Chronic syndrome: anemia, weight loss, decreased
production and weaning weights, liver condemna-
tion; predisposes to clostridial diseases.

Diagnosis: Eggs in Fecal sedimentation. At necropsy,
trematodes (flukes) are found in bile ducts, tracts
within liver parenchyma. Serology: ELISA test.

Treatment: Albendazole, PO 10 my/kg (cattle); 15

  

mg/kg (sheep)
Clorsulon, 7 mg/kg PO
Nitroxynil, 10 mg/kg SC
Rafoxanide, 7.5 mg/kg PO
Prevention: Snail control; fence off snail-infested areas.

Moniezia benedeni

Common name: Tapeworm (Anoplocephalidac).
Adult size: Up to 100 cm in small intestine.
Size of egg: 60 jun.

Importance: Relatively nonpathogenic.

 

Diagnosis: Rectangular segments in feces, eggs in fecal
flotation. At necropsy, adult tapeworms (I00 cm)
in small intestine.

Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg, PO

Dichlorophen, 200-400 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Lead arsenate, 0.5-1.0 2/50 Ib. PO
Niclosamide, 50 mg/lb, PO

 

Tritrichomonas foetus

Common name: ‘Trich (Mastigophora), a flagellated
protozoan parasite.
Size of trophozoite: 10-25 jum in genital tract.
Importance: Venereal disease of cattle, early abortion
storms (15 to 18 days after conception) and py-
ometra.
Diagnosis: Preputial washings and culture.
Treatment: Ipronidazole, 30 g/bull on day I, then 15
g/bull q 24h on days 2 and 3.
Metronidazole, 75 mg/kg IV q 12 hx 3d
Self-limiting in cows not bred for 90 days after abor-
tion.
Note: Trichomonas vaginalis in humans is treated with
metronidazole, 500 mg q 12h x 7 d,or2 gina
single dose, or 2. gq 24h x 3-5 d.
    
 

Fig. 99b. Tritrichomonas foetus. Fresh smear.

 

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Fig. 97c. Fasciola hepatica. The operculum has opened.

 

Fig. 98c. Moniezia benedeni. Note hooks in egg.

   

Fig. 99c. Tritrichomonas foetus. Stained specimen.

aay
Section 5

 

Fig. 100a. Babesia bigemina. Incubation period is variable
(14-70 days).

 

Eimeria spp.

 

eu.

Fig. 101a. Eimeria spp. Prepatent period is 12-18 days

 

9 o
€ d
—-
QO

Fig. 102a. Cryptosporidinm sp. Prepatent period is 3-5
days.

92

Babesia bigemina

Common name: Babesia or pyroplasma (Apicomplexa).
Size of trophozoite

 

3 jun x 4-5 yum in red blood
cells.

Importance: Causes Texas cattle fever (babesiosis, pyro-
plasmosis), anemia, high fever, splenomegaly. This
is an exotic and reportable disease in the USA. It
is transmitted by Boopbilus ticks, which are also
reportable.

Diagnosis: Stained blood smear.

Treatment: Dip for ticks.

Acriflavine, 200-400 ml IV or 1:200 to 1:1,000 solu-
tion

Berenil, 3.5-.

Phenamide, 9.0-

 

5.0 mg/kg IM
5 mg/kg IM

 

Eimeria spp.

Common name: Coccidia (Apicomplexa).
Size of ooc

 

16-47 jum x 13-32 pm in small intes-
tine; several species. (See Tables 19 and 21.)
Importance: Some pathogenic species cause clinical coc-

cidiosis. Young animals: bloody diarrhea, death.
Adults: decreased production, diarrhea.
Diagnosis: Occysts in fecal flotation. Hyperemic, hem-
orrhagic intestines, whitish raised lesions in intes-
tines found at necropsy.
Treatment: Amprolium, 10 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 5-21 d
Sulfamethazine, 0.5% in feed, or 130 mg/kg PO, then
65 mglkg gq I2hx4d
Prevention: Decoquinate, 0.5 mg/kg PO q 24h x 284 d
Lasalocid, | mg/kg PO q 24 h x 30+ d
Monensin, 0.25 mg/kg PO in feed q 24h x 31 d
Sulfaguanidine, 0.2% of feed

Cryptosporidium spp.

Common name: Crypto (Apicomplexa).

Size of oocyst: 6 {im x 6 pum in small intestine.

Importance: Diarrhea in calves 1-2 weeks old; varying
pathogenicity; transmissible to humans.

Diagnosis: Oocysts in fecal flotation. Oocysts float high
against coverslip — focus high.

Treatment: Supportive care.
 

 

  
   

 

Fig. 100b. Babesia bigemina (arrows). In the red blood cells.

 

Ge

a
Fig. 101b. Eimeria sp. (arrow).

Fig. 102b. Cryptosporidium sp. (arrowheads).

93

 

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

   

a ©

Fig. 102c. Cryptosporidium sp.

aay
Section 5

Gongylonema sp.

 

Fig. 103. Gongylonema pulchrum prepatent period i un-
known,

  

Stephanofilaria spp.

Fig. 104. Stephanofilaria stilesi prepatent period is 6-8
weeks.

 

Onchocerca spp.

Fig. 105. Onchocerea spp. prepatent period is 6-12
months.

 

  

94

Gongylonema sp.

 

Common name: Esophageal worm (Spiruroidea).

 

Adult siz
Siz

Importance:

12 cm in mucosa of esophagus.

 

of egg: 70-35 yum.

 

Jery low pathogenicity, but may cause irri-
tation.

Diagnosis: Eggs in Fecal flotation.

 

Treatment: None known.

Stephanofilaria spp.

Common name: Brisket worm (Filarioidea).

Adult size: 3-8 cm in subcutaneous tissue.

Size of microfilaria: 500-600 jum.

Importance: Causes dermatic lesions on the ventral ab-

 

domen.

 

Diagnosis: Deep skin scrapings; look for adults or mi-
crofilariae in tissue near lesion.
Treatment: None.

Prevention: Control of horn flies, the vector.

Onchocerca spp.

Common name: Skin nodular worm (Filarioidea).
Adult (up to 80 cm) coiled in subcutaneous tissue.

Size of microfilariae: 200 = 260 pm.

Importance: Microfilariae may cause keratitis or iritis.
Infected carcass may not be suitable for sale.

Diagnosis: Identification of microfilariae from an ex-
cised piece of skin near nodules.

Treatment: None.

Prevention: Arthropod control.
 

Setaria cervi

Fig. 106. Setaria (Artionemia) sp. prepatent period is variable:

 

Fig. 107. Parumphistonmm sp. prepatent period is 48-95
days.

 

Taenia saginata

Fig. 108. Taenia saginata prepatent period is $10 weeks.

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Setaria cervi

Common name: Abdominal worm (Filarioidea).

Adult size: 8-13 em; free in abdominal cavity in cattle
sheep, and goats.

Size of microfilariae: 140-230 um.

Importance

 

May cause cerebral nematodiasis. Usually
nonpathogenic.

Diagnosis: Identification of microfilariae in blood.
Treatment: None.

Paramphistomum sp.

Common name: Rumen fluke (Paramphistomatidae).

 

Adult size: S-15 mm in rumen,

Size of egg: 150 jm x 75 wm.

Importance: Adults are nonpathogenic. Immature
flukes may cause enteritis and diarrhea

Diagnosis: Fecal sedimentation technique, detect eggs.

Niclosamide, 90 mg/kg PO

Oxyelozanide, 25 mg/kg PO

Treatment

 

Taenia saginata

Common name: Beef cysticercosis, measles (Taeniidae).
Cysticereus in meat.

Size of cysticercus: 3-10 mm.

Importance: Responsible for carcass condemnation, re-

tention, or trimming. ‘Transmission is from

 

ses in
human feces to carte by ingestion,

Diagnosis: Observation at necropsy; serological tests,

Treatment: None that are economically justified.

Prevention: Prevent contaminarion of human feces in
cattle feed.

In humans, ‘1: saginata is treated with niclosamide

(Yomesan) 2 g chewed asa single dose q 24h x 5

dl or with praziquantel 5-20 mg/kg, PO once.

95

aay
Section 5

Thysanosoma actinioides

Common name: Fringed tapeworm (Anoplocephalidae)

Adult size: Up to 30 mm in common bile duet and
small intestine.
100 tm x 90 pm.

Importance: Relatively nonpathogenic; decreased

 

Size of egg packe

 

weight gains. Responsible for liver condemnation.
Diagnosis: Segments in feces; observe at necropsy.
Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Eenbendazole, 5-10 mg/kg PO

 

Fig, 109. Thysanosoma actinivides prepatent period is 1
month.

Taenia hydatigena

Common name: C:

 

ysticercus tenuicollis (Tacniidae).

 

Size of cysticercus: Up to 3. em.

Importance: Cysticercus has one scoles; relatively non-
pathogenic;, may be confused with a hydatid cyst
(many scolices).

Diagnosis: Cysticercus found free in peritoneal cavity
or attached to or in omentum or liver at necropsy.

Treatment: None.

 

Prevention: Do not feed sheep offal to dogs. Deworm
Taenia hydatigena *

 

“ clogs for tapeworms. Do not allow access of sheep
to dog feces.

Fig. 110. ‘Iucnia bydatigena, Prepatent period in dog is SI

days.

Echinococcus granulosus

Common name: Hydatid cyst (Tacniidac).

Size of hydatid cyst: Up to 10 em.

Importance: Sheep are intermecliate hosts for E. gram
losis and sources of infection for carnivores.

Diagnosis: Cyst is usually found in lung or liver at
necropsy.

Treatment: None.

Prevention: Do not fe

 

1 sheep offal to dogs or wild

 

canids, treat all dogs for tapeworms.

\ erm granulosus LA

a

Fig. 111. Eebinococens gramosus. Prepatent period in
dog, is 7-9 weeks.

 

96
 

Taenia ovis

Fig. 112. Taenia ovis. Prepatent period in dogs is 60 days.

 

Taenia multiceps

Fig. 113. Teenia multiceps. Prepatent period in d

 

months.

 

Elaeophora schneideri

Fig, 114. Elacophora selneideri prepatent period is 4-5
months.

97

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Taenia ovis

Common name: Sheep cysticercosis (Yaeniidae).

Size of cysticercus: Up to 5 mm.

Importance: Responsible for condemnation or trim-
ming.

Diagnosis: Cysticercus is found in muscles at necropsy.

Treatment: None,

Prevention: Do not feed raw meat to dogs or wild
canids. Deworm all dogs for tapeworms.

Taenia multiceps

 

Common name: Gid (Taeniidae).
: Up to 4em.
Importance: Rare in the United States. Causes CNS dis-

Size of coenuru

 

orders.
Diagnosis: Coenurus usually in brain at necropsy.
Treatment: None.
Prevention: Do not feed raw offal to dogs or wild
canids. Deworm all dogs for tapeworms.

Elaeophora schneideri

Common name: Sorchead, filarial dermatitis

 

(Filarioidea).

Adult size: 6-12 mm in arteries anterior to heart, mi-

 

crofilariac in skin of head.

Size of microfilaria: 300 jum x 6 jum.

Importance: A common parasite of mule deer in the
Western United States. Causes filarial dermatitis
“sorehead” in sheep, usually older sheep.

Diagnosis: Microfilariae can be seen in skin, such as a
skin punch from the ear placed in saline in a Petri
dish.

Treatment: None.

aay
Section 5

External Parasites

Musca autumnalis

Fig. 115. Common flies found on ruminants.

Table 29. List of common flies found on ruminants

FLIES

   

Musca domestica

 

 

Calliphora Sarcophaga

 

Siphona

 

Stomoxys

5mm

 

Genus and Species

Common Name

 

Biting Flies
Simulium spp.
Culicoides spp.
Tabanus!Ch
Stomoxys culcitrans
Siphona (Haematobia) irritans
Melophagus ovinus

 

YysOps spp:

Aedes, Culex, Anopheles, etc.

Nonbiting Flies
Musca autumnalis
Musca domestica
Fannia spp.
Erystalis tenax

Myiasis-producing Flies
Hypoderma spp.
Cochliomyia hominovorax
Oestrus ovis
Odemagena tarandi
Cephenemyia spp.
Phaenicia(Lucilia), Phormia, Calliphora

98

Black flies, buffalo gnats
Biting gnats, punkies, no see-ums
Horse and deer flies

Stable fly

Horn fly

Sheep ked

Mosquitoes

Face fly
House fly

Latrine fly, little house fly
Drone fly, rat-tailed maggot

Cattle bor fly
Screwworm fly
Sheep bot fly
Caribou warble fly
Deer nasal bot fly
Blowflies or fleece worms

 
 

Fig. 116. Hypoderma lineatum (H. bovis is similar). Life
cycle is 10-12 months.

  

Cochliomyia hominivorax

 

117. Cochliomyia bominivorax. Life cycle is 3 weeks.

 

   

\ ; *
\ fr '
yi ! '
d UU ees
Blowfly

  

ig. 118. Sheep blowtlies (bottle flies). Life cycle is 10
days.

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Hypoderma lineatum

Common name: Common cattle bot fly (HL lineatinn
and northern cattle bot fly (I. bovis) (Insecta:
Diptera).

Size: Larvae (grubs) are up ro 30 mm

Importance: Larvae migrate through flesh and cause a
reduction in weight gain and value of hides.
Migrate to esophagus (H. lineatum) or spinal col-
umn (H. bovis) before forming warbles on the

aay

back. Adult flies do not sting or bite, but territy
cattle and predispose to physical injury and signiti
cant production losses

Diagnosis: Third-stage larvae form warbles on the back
of cattle, Also oceasionally in bison, horses, sheep.
and goats.

Treatment: Pour-on organophosphates: coumaphos,
famphur, fenthion, trichlorfon; ivermectin, do
ramectin, eprinomectin, moxidectin. Do not treat
with organophosphates in late fall when grubs are
in the submucosa of the esophagus (II. lineatum
because an inflammatory edematous reaction may
occur, or in the epidural fat of the spinal eanal (1
bovis) because inflammation and paraplegia may
occur,

Cochliomyia hominivorax

Common name: Serewworm (Inseeta-Diptera).

Larvae size: Larvae are up to 15 mm.

Importance: A reportable disease in the United States
Highly pathogenic to all livestock, causing mortali

 

ty. Maggots penetrate into tissue where there is
broken skin, Usually found in southern Texas only

Diagnosis: Send larvae from wounds to state diagnostic
laboratory.

Treatment: Ivermectin, organophosphates.

Prevention: Release of sterile male flies.

Blowflies

Common name: Sheep blowtlies or bottle flies (Licilir,
Phormia, Calliphora, etc.

 

; (Insecta-Dipteral.
Larvae size: Larvae (grubs) are up to 15 mm.

 

Importance: Responsible for myiasis “strike” in sheep

Diagnosis: Find larvae in rotting wool on sheep.

Treatment: Clean the wound and treat with organophos
phates.

Prevention: Sanitation and management to prevent wet,
dirty wool — crutching, docking, shearing, ete:
treatment of parasites and other organisms that
predispose to diamhea; fly contol.

 
Section 5

 

Oestrus ovis

Fig. 119. Oestrus ovis is in host for | month or through
the winter.

 

Musca autumnalis

120. Musea autumnalis. Lite cycle & variable, 10-14

  

 

Musca domestica

121. Musca domestica. Life cycle is variable, 10-14
days.

 

100

Oestrus ovis

Common name: Sheep nasal bot fly (Insecta-Diptera).
Larvae siz

 

Larvae up to 15 mm.

 

Importance: Causes nasal discharge and difficuley in
breathing. Adult flies frighten sheep and predis-
pose to reduced production,
Diagnosis: Clinical signs; observe larvae at necropsy.
Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC
Bacillus thuringiensis as an aerosol

Musca autumnalis

Common name: Face fly (Insecta-Diptera).

6-9 mm.
ritate the eyes and nostrils, may predis-
pose to bacterial

 

 

atoconjunctivitis “pink eye”,

 

e
transmit ¢

 

eworms (Thelazia spp.), and infectious
bovine rhinotracheitis.

Diagnosis: Identification of flies.

Treatment: See Table 27.

Prevention: Sanitation; feed larvaciclal drugs such as
methoprene or tetrachlorvinphos; insecticide-
impregnated ear tags; biological control methods.

Musca domestica

Common name: House fly (Insecta-Diptera).
5-12 mm.

Importance: Irritate cattle, cause reduced weight gains

Adult siz

 

and loss of production.

Diagnosis: Identification of flies.

Treatment: See Table 27.

Prevention: Sanitation; feed larvacidal drugs such as
methoprene, tetrachlorvinphos, or chlorfenvin-
phos; insecticide-impregnated ear tags; biological
control methods.
 

Siphona (Haematobia) irritans

Fig, 122. Sipbona (Haematobia) irritans. Life cycle is 3
weeks or more.

   

 

Stomoxys calcitrans

Fig. 123. Stomoxys calcitrans. Life cycle is 4 weeks or
more.

eae) \

 

Fig. (24. Tabanns spp. One generation per year

 

  

101

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Siphona (Haematobia) irritans

Common name: Horn fly (Insecta-Diptera).
Adult size: 4-5 mm.

 

  

Importance: Irritate cattle; occur in large numbers and
cause weight and blood loss, and reduce produc-
tion.

Diagnosis: Identification of adult fly. Size is smaller
than a house fly, Usually feed with head down.

Treatment: See Table 27.

Prevention: Ivermectin kills larvae in manure; metho-
prene as a Feed additive; insecticide-impregnated
(fenvalente, permethrin) ear tags; biological con-
trol.

Eprinomectin at 0.5 mg/kg as a pour on is effective.
Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg as a pour on is effective.

Stomoxys calcitrans

Common name: Stable fly (Insecta-Diptera).

Adult size: 7-8 mm.

Importance: These are persistent blood-sucking flies
that bite and irritate cattle; cause reduced weight
gains and reduced feed efficiency.

Diagnosis: Identification of adult fly. Size of a house fly,
but proboscis projects straight forward.

Treatment: See Table 27.

Prevention: Flies bre

{ in rotting vegetation; therefore,

   

sanitation is helpful. Methoprene fed to animals
or use Bacillus thuringiensis.

Tabanus spp.

Common name: Horse fly (Insecta-Diptera).
Adult size: Up to 30 mm.
Importance: Vicious biters, causing stampeding and re-

 

duction of weight gain. ‘Transmit anaplasmosis,
ete.

Diagnosis: Identification of adult fly.

Treatment: See Table 31.

aay
Section 5

BOVINE LICE

   
 

Solenopotes
capillatus

Haematopinus eurysternus

 

Linognathus vituli

Fig. 125. Common lice found on ruminants.

Table 30. List of common lice found on ruminants

 

 

 

 

Genus and Species Common Name

Mallophaga (biting lice)
Bovicola (Damalinia) spp. Biting or chewing louse

Anoplura (sucking lice)

Haematopinus eurysternus Short-nosed cattle louse
Linognathus africanus African blue louse
Linognathus vituli Long-nosed cattle louse
Linognathus stenopsis Goat sucking louse
Linognathus pedalis Sheep foot louse
Linognathus ovillus Sheep face and body louse
Solenopotes capillatus Little blue cattle louse

 

102
 

Fig. 126a. Life cycle of a biting louse (about 4 weeks).

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

 

Fig. 126b. Bovicola ( Damalinia) bovis.

Bovicola (Damalinia) bovis

 

Common name: Biting louse (Insecta-Mallophaga) of Treatment: See Table 27. Usually dipping or high pressure
cattle, sheep, and goats. sprays Coumaphos, 25% wettable powder at 0.06%
Size of adult: 2-3 mm. Diazinon, 50% wettable powder at 0.03%
Importance: Cause irritation and weight loss; constant Cypermethrin, 2.5% as a pour on
scratching, licking, and biting affected areas. Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC
Most common in fall and winter. In cattle are Eprinomectin, 0.5 mg/kg as a pour on
usually on neck, brisket, head, and between legs. Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Diagnosis: Examination of skin and hair for eggs, All animals must be treated simultaneously.

nymphs, and adult lice.

 

—_ <P

Sucking Lice

 

 

Fig, 127a. Life cycle of a sucking louse (about 4 weeks).

 

Fig. 127b. Linognathus sp.

Linognathus sp.

Common name: Sucking lice (Insecta-Anoplura) of cattle, sheep, and goats. Includes L. vitili (long-nosed or blue cattle

louse); Haematopinns eurysternus (short-nosed cattle louse). In sheep, Linognathus spp. are prima

Affected animals lick, scratch, and bite-affected areas.

 

Size of adult: 2.5-5.0 mm.

Importance: Cause irritation and weight loss; may cause anemia.

   

Diagnosis: Examine skin and hair for eggs, nymphs, and adults.

 

y on the legs.

Treatment: See Table 27. All animals must be treated simultaneously.

103

aay
S44

Section 5

 

Capitulum inferior: scutum absent
FAMILY ARGASIDAE - SOFI TICKS

_capitulum

 

ventral Doral

‘Margin of body vath definite Margin of bod thick, ounded.
without definite sutural ine.

 

 

 

 

Capitulam anterior: scutum present
FAMILY INODIDAF = HARD TICKS

   

Female. dorsal Male. dorsal

And groove either behind —_—_Anal groove in front of anus
‘anus, indistinct or absent

wy A

rea
Argas
Hypostome with wet deve __-Hypostomevestgil or with Second segment of palpi not Ye segment of pap at
‘opedtecth integument mamil- _outeffectiveteethintegu laterally produced ely produced
lated ment tuber culated or gran
ai : i 5 my 5
7 tizemeprsais
Ornithodoros Olobius
‘Mouthparts much longer than ua woowout Tong as basis
basiseapitul Scutum wath eyes. capt
, " FR
boss capt tayo fase capitli not later
produced
yr.
Rainidgeddorsslyand —peonszosent. _fipinotidged __Festoons preset Dermacentor
° 2
Boophilus Rhipicephalus

 

128. Simplitied key to common ticks of animals and birds.

 

Dermacentor Ambylomma Ixodes oophilus

 

104

 

Rhipicephalus Haemaphysalis

g. 129. Morphology of basis capitulam and scutum of the major genera of ticks.
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Hypostome

  
  
   

Basis capitulum
Cervical Groove
Eye

Lateral Groove

Ornate Markings
Spiracular Plate

Basis capitulum Pr
Genital Aperture
Genital Groove wf

Anus

   

 

 

 

 

      
 

 

Femur ‘Adanal Shield
Festoon
Tibia
Tarsus
Metatarsus
Fig. 130. Simplified morphology of a tick.
Table 31. Common ticks and mites of cattle
Genus and Species Common Name
Ticks Host
Dermacentor variabalis American dog tick *3
Dermacentor andersoni Rocky Mountain wood tick ‘
Dermacentor albipictus Winter tick Engorged tN.
, . al SS
Dermacentor occidentalis Pacific coast tick emale se
Ixodes scapularis Black-legged tick
Amblyomma americanum Lone star tick
Amblyonuna maculatian Gulf coast tick Tick
Boophilus annulatus Cattle tick —— |
ill ! hern cattle tie ©9s
Boophilus microplus Southern cattle tick Host
Otobius megnini Spinose ear tick “2 \ /
Ornithodorus cariacens Pajorocllo tick \,.2.. Nymph
Mites Kee Larva ,/
Psoroptes ovis Mange mite, scab mite “ AR .
. ie ®&.
Sarcoptes scabei Mange mite eB
Chorioptes bovis Mange mite Host
Demodex bovis Mange mite a
Psorergates bos Itch mite Fig. 131. Life cycle of a three-host tick.

 

105
etd

Section 5

 

Psoroptes sp.

Fig. 132a. Psoroptes sp. Life cycle is about 3 weeks.

 

Sarcoptes scabiei

133a. Sarcoptes scabiei. Life cycle is about 3 weeks.

 

 

Chorioptes sp.

Fig. 34a. Chorioptes sp. Life cycle is about 3 weeks.

106

Psoroptes sp.

 

mmon name: Mange mite or scab mite of cattle,
sheep, and goats (Arachnida-Psoroptidae),

Adult size: 500 ptm (male); 700 pum (female).

Importance: This is a reportable disease in cattle and
sheep in some states. It is very contagious and
highly pathogenic, causing dramatic weight loss.
Mites puncture skin and cause inflammation and
hair loss. Affected animals bite and scratch.
Affects cattle and sheep.

Diagnosis: Skin scraping at the periphery of the crusty

lesion. Mites have long,

Treatment: Ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg, SC; treat twice at 3

jointed pedicels.

week interval
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM
Moxide

 

tin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

Sarcoptes scabiei

Common nam

 

Mange mite of cattle and sheep
(Arachnida-Sarcoptidae).
Adult size: 250 pum (male); 600 jim (female),

Importance: This is a reportable disease in cattle in

 

some states. Causes intensive itching.

Diagnosis: Skin scraping, Mites have long, nonjointed
pedicels.

‘Treatment: Ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg SCs treat twice at 3+
week interval

 

:prinomectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM

 

Chorioptes sp.

Common name: Mange mite of cattle, sheep, and goats
(Arachnida-Psoroptidae).
Adult size: 250 pum (male); 600 jum (female).
Importance: This is a reportable disease in cattle in
some states. It is not as pathogenic as Psoroptes
or Sarcoptes. Causes tail or foot mange.
Diagnosis: Skin scraping, Mites have very short, un-
jointed pedicels.
Krearment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC; treat twice at 3-
week interval
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM.
Eprinomectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg, pour on

 

 
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

 

  

Fig. 132c. Psoroptes sp. adult female with egg (large arrow).

.; a mating pair of Ps tes. 7
132b. Psoroptes sp.; a mating pair of Psorop: Inset shows jointed pedicels at ends of legs (smaller arrows).

 

Fig. 133c. Sarcoptes scabiei enlarged anterior view (ar-
rows: nonjointed pedicels).

 

Fig. 133b. Sarcoptes scabiei. Arrows indicate
nonjointed pedicels.

      

¢ Secs ee Fig. 134c. Chorioptes sp. (arrows: very short pedicels).
Fig. 134b. Chorioptes sp.

107
Section 5

 

Psorergates sp. 2s S f

Fig. 135a. Life cycle of Psorergates sp. Fig. 135b. Psorergates sp

Psorergates sp.

Common name: Itch mite (Arachnida-Psoroptidae).
Adult size: 165 jum (male); 190 um (female). Body is almost spherical.
Importance: May be confused with reportable mites, but is much smaller. Infection spreads very slowly over several
years. Mild, chronic irritation. Affects cattle and sheep, but is rare.
Diagnosis: Skin scrapings.
Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC
Organophosphate sprays after shearing

eK

¢
Ne ae?

    

Melophagus ovinus Fig. 136b. Melophagus ovinus.

Fig. 136a. Life cycle of Melophagus ovinus

Melophagus ovinus

Common name: Sheep ked, erroneously called a sheep tick (Insecta-Diptera).

Adult size: 5-8 mm. Life cycle is about 3 months, adults live about 3 months.

Importance: Causes irritation, lesions to the skin (cockle), anemia, wool loss, and reduction in weight gain.
Diagnosis: Visual observation of wool for pupae and adults.

 

Treatment: Spray applications of trichlorphon, coumaphos, crotoxyphos, fenchlorphos, tetrachlorvinphos, phosmet.
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC. Treat after shearing because shearing removes a majority of the keds.

108

 
Bibliography
Nematodes

Anderson N: The efficiency of levamisole, thiabenda-
zole and fenbendazole against naturally acquired in-
fections of Ostertagia ostertagi in cattle. Res Vet Sei
23:298-302, 1977.

Armour J: Bovine ostertagiasis: A review. Vet Rec
$6:184-190, 1970.

Armour J: Parasitic gastroenteritis in cattle. Vet Rec
95:391-395, 1974.

Armour J, Bruce RG: Inhibited development of
Ostertagia ostertagi infections: A diapaus

 

phenome-
non in a nematode. Parasitology 60:16 1-174, 1974.

Armour J, Bairden K, Preston JM: Anthelmintic effi-
ciency of ivermectin against naturally occurring gas-

   

trointestinal nematodes of sheep. Vet Rec
111:809-81, 1982.
Baker NF, Fisk RA, Bushnell
rence of infective nematode larvae on irrigated pas-
ture grazed by cattle in California, Am | Vet Res
42:1188-1191, 1981.
Barger 1A, Gibbs HC: Milk production of cows infect-

RB, ct al: Seasonal occur-

ed experimentally with trichostrongylid parasites.
Vet Parasitol 9:69-73, 1981.

Becklund WW: Revised check list of internal and exter-
nal parasites of domestic animals in the United
States and possessions and in Canada. Am J Vet Res
25:1380-1416, 1964.

Bliss HID, Todd AC: Milk production by Vermont dairy
cattle after deworming. Vet Med Small Anim Clin
81:125 1-1254, 1976.

Brunsdon RV: The
cay counts of sheep comparison of the spring rise

onal variations in the nematode

 

phenomenon in breeding and unmated ewes. NZ Ver
J 12:75-80, 1966.

Connan RM: The post parturient rise in fecal nematode
cgg counts of ewes: Its actiology and epidemiological
significance. World Rev Anim Prod 4:53-58, 1968.

Courtney CH, Sundlof SE: Veterinary Antiparasitic
Drugs, A Compreshensive Compendium of EDA-
Approved Antiparasitic Drugs, American
Association of Veterinary Parasitologists Publication
SP96, University of Florida, Gainesville, 224 pages,
1991,

Craig TM: Seasonal transmission of bovine gastroin-

 

testinal nematodes in the Texas Gulf Coast. J Ant

Vet Med Assoc 174:844-847, 1970.
Donald AD, Morley FHW, Waller PH, et al.

reproduction, genotype and anthelmintic treatment

 

Effects of

 

of ewes on Ostertagia spp. populations. Int Parasitol
12:403-4 11, 1982.

Foreyt WJ, Wescott RB, Johnson R, et al.: Treatment
for lungworms (Prostostrongylus spp.) in Rocky

109

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Mountain bighorn sheep. Vet Med Small Anim Clin
78:1435-1439, 1983.

Gibbs HC: Gastrointestinal nematodiasis in dairy cat-
tle. J Dairy Sci 65: 2182-2188, 1981.

Gibbs HC: Mechanisms of survival of nematode para-
sites with emphasis on hypobiosis. Ver Parasitol
11:25-48, 1982.

Gibbs HC: Relative importan

 

  

¢ of winter survival of
larval nematodes in pasture and infected carrier
calves in a study of parasitic gastroenteritis in calves.
Am J Vet Res 40:227-231, 1979.

Gibbs HC, Kitsos A: Effectiveness of a slow release,
morantel tartrate anthelmintic bolus for controlling

 

  

parasitic gastroenteritis in replacement dairy heifers.
Am | Vet Res 46:2241-2244, 1985.
Goudie C, Evans NA, Gration KA, et al.: Doramectin:

   

 

a potent novel endectocide. Ver Parasitol 49:5-15,
1993.

Gregory E, Foreyt WJ, Breeze R: Efficacy of ivermectin
and fenbendazole against lungworms. Vet Med
80:1 14-117, 1985.

Grisi L, Todd AC: Prevalence of gastrointestinal para-
sites among milking cows in Wisconsin,
Pennsylvania, and North Carolina, Am J Vet Res
39:51-54, 1978.

Guichon PT, Jim GK, Booker CW, ct al: Relative cost-
effectiveness of treatment of feedlot calves with iver-
mectin versus treatment with a combination of fen-
bendazole, permethrin, and fenthion. J Arn Vet Med
Assoc 216:1965-1969, 2000.

Gupta RP, Gibbs HC: Epidemiological investigations
on Dictyocaulus viviparus (Block, 1782) infection in
cattle, Can Vet J 11:149-156, 1970.

Hammerberg B, Lamm WD: Changes in periparturient
fecal egg counts in beef cows calving in the spring.
Am J Vet Res 41:1686-1689, 1980.

Herd RP: A practical approach to parasite control in
dairy cows and heifers. Compend Continuing Ed
5:73-80, 1983.

Herd RP, Heider LE: Control of internal parasites in
dairy replacement heifers by two treatments in the
spring. | Am Vet Med Assoc 177:51-54, 1980.

Herd RP, Parker CE, McClure KE: Epidemiologic ap-
proach to the control of sheep nematodes. | Am Ver
Med Assoc 184:680-687, 1984.

Herd RP, Riedel RM, Heider LE: Identification and epi-

 

demiologic significance of nematodes in a dairy
barn. J Am Vet Med Assoc 176:1370-1373, 1980.

Herlich H: The effects of the intestinal worms,
Cooperia pectinata and Cooperia oncopbora on ex-
perimentally infected calves. Arm J Vet Res
26:1032-1035, 1965.

Herlich [: The importance of helminth infections in
ruminants. World Anim Rev 26:22-26, 1978.

aay
S144

Section 5

Kennedy T], Todd AC: Efficae:
gastrointestinal parasites of sheep. Am J Vet Res
36: 1465-1467, 1975.

Lyons ET, Drudge JF: Two eye worms Thelazia gulosa
and Thelazia skrjabini in cattle in Kentucky. |
Parasitol 61:1 119-1122, 1975.

Malezewski A, Westcott RB, Spratling BM, et al.:
Internal parasites of Washington cattle. Am_[ Vet
Res 36:1671-1675, 1975.

Randall RW, Gibbs HC: Effects of clinical and subclini-
cal gastrointestinal helminthiasis on digestion and
energy metabolism in calves. Ant | Vet Res
42:1730-1734, 1981.

Robers JI, Swan RA: Quantitative studies of ovine

"of fenbendazole against

 

  

haemonchosis I. Relationship between fecal egg
counts and total worm counts. Vet Parasitol
8:165-171, 1981.

Ross JG, Dow C: The course and development of the
abomasal lesion in calves experimentally infected
with the nematode parasite Ostertagia ostertagi. Br
Vet J 121:228-233, 1965.

Smith HJ, Archibald R Mc!
of ovine gastroimestinal parasites in the maritime
provinces. Can Vet | 6:257-267, 1965.

Theodorides VJ, Nawalinski T, Chang J: Efficacy of al-

 

 

The overwinter survival

bendazole against Haemonclus, Nematodirus,
Dietyocuulus, and Moniesia of sheep. Am | Vet Res
37:15 15-1516, 1976.

Thomas RJ, Ali DA: The effect of Haemonelus contor-
tus infection of the pregnant and lactating ewe. bit |
Parasitol 11:393-398, 1983.

Yodd KS, Mansfield ME, DiPetro JA: Anthelmintic effi-
cacy of avermectin B,, and dihydroavermeetin By,

 

against ovine gastrointestinal nematodes in 1977.
Am J] Vet Res 45:976-977, 1984.

Yunnicliffe EA: The occurrence of Cooperia oncophora
and Nematodirus helvetiants in calves. | Am Vet
Med Assoe 33:250-241, 1932.

Wescott RB, LeaMaster BR: Efficacy of ivermectin
against naturally acquired and experimentally in-
duced nematode infections in sheep. Am | Vet Res
43:531-533, 1982.

Williams JC, Know JW, Baumann BA, et al.: Seasonal
changes of gastrointestinal nematode populations in
yearling beef cattle in Louisiana with emphasis on
prevalence of inhibition of Ostertagia ostertagi. [nt ]
Parasitol 13:133-143, 1983.

Williams JC, Lovacano AK, DeRosa A, eta

parison of persistent anthelmintic efficacy of topical

 

 

A com-

formulations of doramectin, ivermectin, epri-

nomectin and moxidectin against naturally acquired
nematode infections of beef calves. Vet Parasitol
85:277-288, 1999.

Williams JC, Nault C, Ramsey RT, et al.: Efficacy of

 

 

110

Cydectin moxicectin 1% injectable against experi-
mental infestations of Dicyocaudus viviparous and
Bunostomaum phlebotomum superimposed on natu-
ral gastrointestinal infections in calves. Vet Parasitol
43:293-299, 1992.

Williams JC, Sheehan DS, Fuselier RH, et al.:
Experimental and natural infection of calves with
Bunostonuin phlebotomumn. Vet Parasitol
13:225-237, 1983.

Yaawinski T, Tucker C, Copeland $, Yazwinski ‘I,
Guerino F: Dose confirmation of moxidectin pour-
on against natural nematode infections of lactating

dairy cows. Vet Parasitol 86:223-228, 1999.

 

Trematodes

Armour J: The epidemiology and control of bovine fas-
cioliasis. Vet Rec 96:198-201, 1975.

Boray JC, Crowfoot PD, Strong MB, et al: Treatment
of immature and mature Fasciola hepatica infections

15-317,

 

 

in sheep with triclabendazole. Ver Ree 1.
1983.

Craig TM, Bell RR: Seasonal transmission of liver
flukes to cattle in the Texas gulf coast. J Ant Vet
Med Assoc 173:104-107, 197:

Craig TM, Huey RL: Efficacy of triclabendazole

 

against Fasciola hepatica and Fascioloides magna in
naturally infected calves. Am J Vet Res
45:1 644-1645, 1984.

Dargie JD, Berry Cl, Parkins J: The pathophysiology
of ovine fascioliasis: Studies on the feed intake and
digestibility, body weight and nitrogen balance of
sheep given rations of hay or hay plusa pelleted
supplement. Res Vet Sci 26:289-295, 1979.

Doyle JJ: Acquired immunity to experimental infection
with Fasciola hepatica in cattle. Res Vet Sei
12:527-534, 1971.

Farrell CJ, Shen D1, Wescott RB, et al: An enzyme-

 

 

 

 

linked immunosorbent assay for diagnosis of
Fasciola hepatica infection in cattle. Ant J Vet Res
42:237-240, 1981.

Foreyt W]: Experimental infection of lymnaeid snails in
Wisconsin with miracidia of Fascioloides magna and
Fasciola hepatica. | Parasitol 64:1132-1134, 1978.

Foreyt WJ, Foreyt KM: Albendazole treatment of ex-

  

perimentally induced Fascioloides magna infection in
goats. Vet Med Small Anim Clinic 75:1441-1444,
1980.

Foreyt WJ, Hunter RL: Clinical Fascioloides magna in-
fection in sheep in Oregon on pasture shared by
Columbian white-tailed deer, An J Vet Res
41: 1531-1532, 1980.

Foreyt WJ, ‘Todd AC: De
American liver fluke Fa

   

lopment of the large

 

ciolvides magna in white-
tailed deer, cattle, and sheep. J Parasitol 62:26-32,
1976.

Foreyt WJ, Todd AC: Liver flukes in cattle: Prevalence,
distribution and experimental treatment. Vet Med
Small Anim Clin 71:816-822, 1976.

Hierpe CA, Tennant BC, Crenshaw GL, et al: Ovine
fascioliasis in California. | Ant Vet Med Assoc
159:1266-1271, 1971.

Hoover RC, Lincoln JD, Hall RE, et al.: Seasonal trans-
mission of Fasciola hepatica to cattle in northwest-
ern United States. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 184:69.

Krull WH, Mapes CR: Studies on the biology of
Dicrocoelium dendriticum (Rudolphi, 1819) Looss,
1899 (Trematoda: Dicrocoeliidac), including its rela-
tion to the intermediate host, Cionella lubrica
(Muller). IX Notes on the cyst, metacercariae, and
infection in the ant, Formica fusca. Cornell Vet
44:389-410, 1954.

Leathers CW, Foreyt WJ, Fetcher A, et al.: Clinical fas-
cioliasis in domestic goats in Montana, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 180:1451-1454, 1982.

Malone JB, Loyacano A, Armstrong DA, ct al: Bovine
fascioliasis: Economic impact and control in Gulf

 

coast cattle based on seasonal transmission. Bovine
Pract 17:126-133, 1982.

Malone JB, Ramsey RT, Loyacano AF: Efficacy of clor-
sulon against 8 week-old experimentally induced
and mature naturally acquired Fasciola hepatica in
cattle. Aim J Vet Res 45:851-854, 1984.

Malone JB, Smith PH, Loyacano A, et a
albendazole for treatment of naturally acquired
Fasciola hepatica in calves. Am | Vet Res
43:879-881, 1982.

Olsen OW: Longevity of metacercariae of Fasciola he-
patica on pastures in the upper coastal region of
Texas and its relationship to liver fluke control. J
Parasitol 33:36-42, 1947.

Price EW: The fluke situation in American ruminants. |
Parasitol 39:1 19-134, 1953.

Symons LEA, Boray J
chronic ovine fascioliasis. Z Tropenmed Parasit
19:45 1-472, 1968.

Vermunt JJ, West DM, Pomroy WE: Multiple resistance
to ivermectin and oxfendazole in Cooperia species of
cattle in New Zealand. Vet Rec 137:43-45, 1995.

Wescott RB, Farrell CJ, Shen DT: Diagnosis of natural-
ly occurring Fasciola hepatica infections in cattle
with an ELISA test, Ani | Vet Res 45:178-179,

1984.

 

‘fficacy of

 

The anemia of acute and

 

 

Protozoa

Abbit B, Meyerhokz GW: Trichomonas foetus infection
of range bulls in south Florida. Vet Med Small

111

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Animal Clin 74:1339-1342, 1979.

Baker NK, Walters Gl, Fish RA: Amprolium for control
of coccidiosis in feedlot lambs. Am | Vet Res
33:83-86, 1972.

Barr BC, Rowe JD, Sverlow KW, et al
reproduction of bovine fetal Neospora infection and
death with a bovine Neospora isolate. ] Vet Diagn
Invest 6:207, 1994.

Bergstrom RC, Maki LR: Coccidiostatic action of mon-
cnsin fed to lambs: Body weight gains and feed con-
version efficacy. Am | Vet Res 37:79-81, 1976.

Bergstrom RC, Maki LR:
crossbred lambs with naturally occurring coccidiosis.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 165: 288-289, 1974.

Beverly JKA, Watson WA: Prevention of experimental
and naturally occurring ovine abortion due to toxo-
plasmosis. Vet Rec 88:39-41, 1971.

Blewett DA, Watson WA: The epidemiology of ovine
toxoplasmosis. I. Possible sources of infection in
outbreaks of clinical disease. Br Vet | 139:546-555,
1983.

Clark BL, Parsonson IL, White ME, et al.: Control of
trichomoniasis in large herd of beef cattle. Aust Vet |
50:424-425, 1974.

Davison H, Otter A, Trees AJ: Estimation of vertical
and horizontal transmission parameters of Neospora

Experimental

 

 

ect of monensin in young,

canimon infections in dairy cattle. fit | Parasitol
29:1683, 1999.

Dubey JP: A review of Sarcocystis of domestic animals
and of other coccidia of cats and dogs. J Arm Vet
Med Assoc 169:1061-1078, 1976.

Dubey JP: Epizootic toxoplasmosis associated with
abortion in dairy goats in Montana. ] Anz Vet Med
Assoc 178:661-670, 198L.

Dubey JP: Toxoplasma, Hammondia, Sarcocystis,

idia of

 

 

Besnoitia and other tissue cyst-forming co
man and animals. In Kreier, JP, (ed): Parasitic
Protozoa. New York, Academic Press, 1977, pp
101-237.

Dubey JP: Toxoplasma-induced abortion in dairy goats.
] Am Vet Med Assoc 178:671-674, 1981.

Dubey JP: Neosporosis in cattle: biology and economic
impact. J Ant Vet Med Assoc 21.4:1160, 1999.

Dubey JP: Recent advances in Neospora and neosporo-
sis. Vet Parasitol 84:349, 1999.

Dubey JP, Kirkbride CA:
due to Toxoplasma gondii in north central United
States. J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:657-660, 1984.

Dubey JP, Lindsay DS, Anderson ML, et al: Induced
transplacental transmission of Neospora caninim in
cattle. | Am Vet Med Assoc 201:709, 1992.

Dubey JP, Speer CA, Epling GP: Sarcocystosis in new-
born calves fecl Sarcocystis cruzi sporocysts from
coyotes. Am | Vet Res 43:2147-2 164, 1982.

 

 

pizootics of ovine abortion

 

Aayq
ota

Section 5

Dubey JP, Weisbrode SE, Speer CA, et al
in goats: Clinic signs and pathologic and hematolog-
ic findings. | Am Vet Med Assoc 178:683-699,
1981.

Fayer R, Reid WME: Control of coccidiosis. In Long PE

The Biology of the Coccidia. Baltimore,

1982.

ald PR, Mansfield ME: Ovine coccidiosis: Effect

Sarcocystosis

  

 

(ed):
Maryland, University Park Press,
Fira

 

of the antibiotic monensin against Kivneria ni-
nakoblyakimovae and other naturally occurring coc-
cidia of sheep. Am J Vet Res 37:7-10, 1978.

Fitzgerald PR, Johnson AE, Hammond DM: Treatment
of genital trichomoniasis in bulls. An J Vet Res
143:259-262, 1963.

Foreyt WJ, Gates NL, Rich J
in salt against ovine coccidia. Am J Vet Res
42:54-56, 1981.

Foreyt WJ, Gates NL, Wescott RB
and monensin against experimentally induced coc-

 

 

:valuation of lasalocid

 

 

‘Hects of lasalocid

cidiosis in confinement-reared lambs from weaning
to market weight. Anz J Vet Res 40:97-100, 1979.
Foreyt WJ, Parish SM, Foreyt KM:
proved weight gains and control of coccidia in
lambs. Am J Vet Res 42:57-60, 198 L.
Gasparini G, Vaghi M, Tardani T: Treatment of bovine

alocid for im-

 

trichomoniasis with metronidazole. Ver Rec
75:940-943, 1963.

Hammond DM, Kuta JE, Miner ML: Amprolium for
control of experimental coccidiosis in lambs. Cornell
Vet 57:611-623, 1967.

Horton GMJ, Stockdale PHG:
and monensin on oocyst discharge, feed utilization

 

:ffects of amprolium

and rumen metabolism of lambs with coccidiosis.
Am J Vet Res 40:966-970, 1979.

Kirkpartrick CE, Farrell JP: Cryptosporidiosis.
Compend Contiming Ed 6:154-165, 1984.

Leek RG, Fayer R, Johnson AT: Sheep experimentally

 

   

   

infected with Sarcocystis from dogs: I. Disease in
young lambs. | Parasitol 63:642-650, 1977.
Leek RG, Fayer R, McLoughlin DK:
ensin on experimentally infections of Eimeria ni-
nakoblyakimovae in lambs. Am J Vet Res
37:339-341, 1976.
Levine ND, Ivens V: The Coccidian Parasites
sporozoa) of Ruminants. Mlinois

 

 

‘ffect of mon-

 

 

 

(Protozoan: |
Biology Monograph No. 44, Urban, fllinois,

1970.

E: Eimeria cbristenseni sp.

University of Illinois Pre
Levine ND, Ivens V, Fritz I

  
 

n, and other coccidia (Protozoa: Eimeriidae) of the
goat. | Parasitol 48:255-269, 1962.
Lima JD: Eimeria caprina sp. n. from the domestic

 

 

goat, Capra hircus, from the USA. | Parasitol
65:902-903, 1979.
Lima JD: Life cycle of Eimeria christenseni Levine,

112

Ivens & Fritz, 1962 from the domestic goat, Capra
hircus. L. | Protozool 27:59-64, 1981.

Long MI, Baszler TV: Fetal loss in BALB/C mice infect-
ed with Neospora caninun, | Parasitol 82:608,
1996.

MeDougal LR: Attempted cross-transmission of coc-

 

cidia between sheep and goats and description of
Eimeria ovinoidalis sp. n. J Protozool 26:109-113,
1979.

McLoughlin DK: Dimetridazole, a systemic treatment
for bovine venereal trichomoniasis I: Oral adminis-
tration. J Parasitol 51:835-836, 1965.

Minneapolis,
Minnesota, Burgess Publishing Co., 1944.

O'Handley RM, Olson ME, McAllister TA: Efficacy of
fenbendazole for treatment of giardiasis in calves.
Am J Vet Res 58:384-388, 1997.

Olson ME, Guselle NII, O’Handley RM, et al
and Cryptosporidium in dairy calves in British
Columia. Can Vet J 38:703-706, 1997.

Parsonson IM, Clark BL, Dufty J: The pathogenesis of
Tritrichomonas foetus infection in the bull. Aust Vet
J 50:421-523, 1984.

Pellerdy LP: Coccidia and Coccidiosis. Berlin, Parey,
1974.

Pout DD: Coccidiosis of sheep: A review. Vet Rec
98:340-341, 1976.

Radostits OM: Stockdale PHG: A brief review of
bovine coccidiosis in western Canada. Can Vet J
21:227-230, 1980.

A, Rhodes CN, Todd AC: Ovine coc-
cidiosis; Comparison of the effects of monensin and

Morgan BB: Bovine trichomonias

 
  

 

 

: Giardia

  

 

 

Samizadeh-Y:

 

aureomycin on lambs infected with coceidia. Av |
Vet Res 40:1107-1109, 1979.

Soulsby EJL: Helminths, Arthropods and Protozoa of
Domesticated Animals. Edition 7. London, Bailliere
Tindall, 198

Thurmond MC, Hietala SK: E
quired Neospora canimun infection on risk of abor-

 

  

‘ect of congenitally ac-

tion and subsequent abortions in dairy cattle. Ant |
Vet Res 58:1381, 1997.

Wilson SK, Kocan AA, Gaudy ET, et al: The preva-
lence of trichomoniasis in Oklahoma beef bull
Bovine Pract (4:109-110, 1979.

Wouda W, Moen AR, Schukken YH: Abortion risk in
progeny of cows after a Neospora caninum epidem-
ic. Theriogenology 49:13 11, 1998.

Xiao L., Saeed K, Herd RP.
fenbendazole against Giardia infection in cattle. Vet
Parasitol 61:165-170, 1996.

 

ficacy of albendazole and

   

External Parasites

Bequaert J: A monograph of the Melophaginae, or ked
flies, of sheep, goats, deer and antelope (Diptera,
Hippoboscidae). Enottomo Am 22:1-220, 1942.
Desch CE Jr., Hoogstraal H, Nutting WB: Biology of
ticks (Metastigmata: Ixodida). In Nutting WB (ed):
Mammalian Diseases and Arachnids, vol 1. Boca
Raton, Florida, CRC Press, Inc., 1984, pp 111-140.
Drummond RO, George JE, Kunz SE: Control of
Arthropod Pests of Livestock: A Review of

 

 

Technology. CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, FL, 1988,

245 pages.
Drummond RO, Lambert G, Smalley HE Jr, et ale
Estimated losses of livestock to pests. In: CRC
Handbook of Pest Management in Agriculture.
Volume 1. Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press, 1981.
Foil LD, Hogsette Ja\: Biology and control of tabanids,
stable flies and horn flies. Rew Se
13:1125-1138, 1994,
Guglicmone AA, Mangold AJ, Munoz C, et al

  

Teeb

Moxidectin pour-on for control of natural popula-
tions of the cattle tick Boophilus microplus
(Acarina: Ixodiae). Vet Parasitol 87:237-241, 2000.
Harwood RE, James MT: Entomology in Human and
Animal Health. MacMillan, New York, 1979.

113

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Hourrigan Jl: Spread and detection of psoroptic sca-
bies of cattle in the United States. J Am Ver Med
Assoc 175:1278=1280, 1979.

Keirans JE, Clifford CM: The genus Ixodes in the
United States: A scanning clectron microscope study
and key to the adults. | Met Entomol (Suppl)
2:1-14, 1978.

Mel.aughlin RE, Addison EM: Tick (Dermacentor al-
bipictus)-induced winter hair loss in captive moose
(Alees alces). | Wild! Dis 22:502-510, 1986.

Steclman CD: Effects of external and internal arthro-

 

 

pod parasites on domestic livestock production. An
Rev Entomol 21:166-178, 1976.

Strickland RK, Gerrish RR, Hourigan JL, et al Ticks
of Veterinary Importance, no. 485. Washington,
D.C, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service,
US. Department of Agriculture, 1976, p. 122.

Williams RE, Hall RD, Broce AB, et al. (eds): Livestock
Entomology. John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1985.

Wright EC, Guilliot FS, Meleney WP: Transmission of
psoroptic mites from bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis
mexicana) to domestic sheep, cattle and rabbits. J
Wild! Dis 17:38 1-386, 1981.

aay
 

Section 6

PARASITES OF LLAMAS

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts

 

 

 

 

 

 

Relative Sizes of
Llama Parasite Eggs

 

 

 

 

Cooperia 3. Haemonchus sp. Ostetagia sp Tichostrongylus. sp
Th 34m 80x45 1m 80x43}um ssctoqn
mA som
ead) ©
Stronayivides sp. Cryptosporidium Eimeria lamae | _ $0 Him
50%22}1m 64m 38x28

 

E. macusaniensis Moniezia sp.
‘926710m 530% 601m

 

 

Capillaria
50% 30}1m

 

Fasciola hepatica Trichuris tenuis
T40%<80 ptm

643240m

Fig. 137. Common parasite eggs and oocysts found in llama feces.

Coccidia in Llamas

‘Table 32. Species of coccidia (Eimeria) in llamas*

Camelostrongylus_ sp.

 

Marshallagia sp.
19.489 j1m

 

 

Species Size (Jum) Prepatent Period
Eimeria alpacae 26 x21 16-18 days
Eimeria lamae 38 x 28 15-16 days
Eimeria macusaniensis 92 x 67 33-34 days
Eimeria punoensis 21x18 10 days

 

“All have micropylar caps,

115

Oesophagostomum sp.
Section 6

Location of Major Parasites

  
  
 

PARASITES OF LLAMAS
Cephenemyia

[compartment 3]

    
    
 
  
 
 
   

Camelostrongylus
Haemonchus meningeal worm
Ostertagia

Trichostrongylus

Marchallagia

 
    
 
 
  
 

 

 

wy Gecum md Golem Lice Damalinia
[czeum_ee cnn | Microthoracius
Oesophagostomum Mites Chorioptes
Trichuris Sarcoptes
Capillaria
Trichostrongylus
Cooperia Fasciola
Nematodirus Fascioloides
Strongyloides
Moniezia
Giardia
Eimeria Sarcocystis
Cryptosporidium (Pseudocyst)
Toxoplasma
(Pseudocyst)
Fig. 138. Locations of the major parasites found in llamas.
Drugs
Table 33. Anthelmintics used commonly in llamas.
Drug Dosage Parasites Affected
Albendazole 10 mg/kg, Liver flukes, gastrointestinal nematodes, lung worms
Clorsulon 7 my/kg, Liver flukes
Dorameetin 0.2 mg/kg, Gastrointestinal nematodes, lungworms, external parasites
Fenbendazole 5-10 mg/kg q 24h x 3d Cestodes, gastrointestinal nematodes, lung worms
Ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg, Gastrointestinal nematodes, lungworms, sarcoptic
mange, sucking lice
Levamisole 5-8 mg/kg, Gastrointestinal nematodes, lungworms
Mebendazole 22 mg/kg q 24h x 3d Gastrointestinal nematodes
Pyrantel pamoate 18 mg/kg q 24h x 1-3 d Gastrointestinal nematodes

 

116
 
  
  
 
     
     
      
    

Parasites of Llamas

Cooperia,
sostomum, Ostertagia,

Common name: Strongyles.
Size of eggs: 77 pum x 45 um.
Importance: These are the most prev,
lamas. Clinical signs of infection are
growth, emaciation, and diarrhea. Preval
highest in young.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 10 mg/kg q 24 x 3 d PO
Ivermectin or doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM
Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg SC, PO
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg q 24h x 3d PO
Pyrantel pamoate, 18 mg/kg q 24 x 1-3 d PO

 
 

  

  

 
 

 
 

Trichuris tenuis

Common name: Whipworm.

Size of egg: 64 jum x 32 yum.

Importance: Poor growth, diarrhea.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.

Treatment: Efficacy is unknown. Recommendations are

treatment with: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO

Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM
Fenbendazole, 10-15 mg/kg q 24h x 3. d PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC

 

Capillaria spp.

Common name: Capillary worm (at least two species).
Size of egg: 50 um x 30 pm, 75 um x 40 pum.
Importance: Unknown. Low prevalence on fecal analy-
sis, high prevalence upon necropsy.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Efficacy is unknown. Recommendations in-
clude treatment with: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM
Fenbendazole, 10-15 mg/kg q 24h x 3. d PO
s : Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC
Pee pee *

Fig. 141. Capillaria sp. Prepatent period is unknown.

117
Section 6

 

Fig. 142. Nematodirus battus (arrow)/N. belvetianus.
Prepatent period is 2-3 weeks_

  

Fig. 143. Eimeria lamae. Prepatent period is 15-16 days.

   

Fig. 144. Cryptosporidium sp. (arrows). Prepatent period
is 3-7 days.

118

Nematodirus battus, N. helvetianus

Common name: Thin-necked intestinal worm,
Size of egg: 200 um x 90 jum.
Importance: Common in llamas, especially young; caus
es poor growth, diarrhea. Bs

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO

Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM

Fenbendazole, 10 mg/kg q 24 hx 3 d PO

Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC

Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg SC, PO

Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg q 24h x 3. d PO

Pyrantel pamoate, 18 mg/kg q 24h x 1-3 d PO

Eimeria lamae

Common name: Coccidia.

Size of oocysts: 38 ym x 28 jum.

Importance: Very common in llamas, especially young.
Causes diarrhea and poor growth, especially in
lamas less than 4 months old.

Diagnosis: Oocysts in fecal flotation (see Table 32).

Treatment: Amprolium, 10 mg/kg PO q 24h x 5-21 d

Sulfamethazine, 0.5% in feed; or 130 mg/kg, PO, then
65 mg/kg q Zh 4d
Prevention: Decoquinate, 0.5 mg/kg PO q 24 x 28+ d
Lasalocid, 1 mg/kg PO q 24 x 30+ d
Monensin, 0.25 mg/kg PO in feed q 24 x 31
Sulfaguanidine, 0.2% of feed

Cryptosporidium sp.

Common nam

 

Crypto.

Size of oocyst: 5 tum x 6 jum.

Importance: Uncommon in llamas, but our laboratory
has seen Cryptosporidium associated diarrhea in
neonatal llamas and weaned llamas. Diarrhea in
young less than 30 days of age is most common.
Note: Cryptosporidiwn can infect humans.

Oocysts in fecal flotation.

Treatment: None. Prevention through sanitation is
helpful.

 

Diagnos
 
   
  
 
  
   
       
   
 
   
 
    
   

Parasites of Llamas

Causes itching, restlessne:
growth. ae
Diagnosis: Direct observation

dorsal midline and rump. Exami
light is helpful. ne
Treatment: Treat all animals simultaneou:

  

Coumaphos, dust, spray
Fenvalerate, spray
Invermectin-type products

amalinia sp. (biting lice). Life (See Table 27 for complete list.)
roximately 3 weeks.

Microthoracius sp.

Common name: Sucking lice.

Size of adult: 2-5 mm.

Importance: Common in llamas, especially in winter.
Causes itching, restlessness, hair loss, and poor
growth.

Diagnosis: Direct observation of hair, especially along
dorsal midline and rump. Examining with a flash-
light is helpful.

Treatment: Treat all animals simultaneously.

Coumaphos, dust, spray
Fenvalerate, spray

= eS Invermectin-type products

Fig. 146. Microthoracits sp. (sucking (See Table 27 for complete list.)

lice). Life cycle is approximately 3 weeks.

 

Sarcoptes scabiei

Common name: Sarcoptic mange mite.

Size of adult: 250-600 jim.

Importance: Was very common, but prevalence is de-
creasing, probably due to use of ivermectin.
Causes alopecia on face, neck, and other areas;
pruritus.

 

Diagnosis: Deep skin scraping at edge of lesion.
Observe mites microscopically.
Treatment: Treat all animals simultaneously.
Ivermectin or doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC; repeat in -
10-14 d. EERE

 

 

47. Sarcoptes scabiei (mange mites).
i approximately 3 weeks.

  
 

Section 6

 

Fig. 148. Meningeal worm larvae in spinal cord. Prepatent
period is 90 + 9 days in deer. Larvae are approximately 50
yum in diameter.

Parelaphostrongylus tenuis

Common name: Meningeal worm or brain worm.
Size of larvae: Less than 100 j1m in diameter in CNS.

 

Insportance: This parasite is found normally in white-
tailed deer in the Eastern USA and Canada. When
larvae in snails are ingested by llamas, the para-
site migrates into the spinal cord and brain and
usually kills the llama. Paralysis and incoordina-
tion are seen before death. Larvae cause severe in-
flammation to the CNS. Death usually occurs
30-60 days after infection. (See references.)

Diagnosis: Evaluation of CNS fluid; eosinophilia is
present. At necropsy larvae are seen histologically
in spinal cord and brain.

Treatment: Ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg SC at 14-day intervals
may prevent most larvae from causing significant
damage. Ivermectin treatment should be initiated
before transmission of larvae occurs. Once lesions
develop, damage is irreversible.

Bibliography

Baumgartner W, Zajac A, Hull BL, et al.:
Parelaphostrongylosis in llamas. ] Am Vet Med
Assoc 187:1243-1245, 1985.

Bishop JK, Rickard L
glama) in Oregon: Incidental recovery of
Nematodirus battus. ] Am Vet Med Assoc
191:1579-1581, 1987.

 

Fecal survey of llamas (Lama

Brown TT, Jr, Jordan HE, Demorest CN: Cerebrospinal
parelaphostrongylosis in llamas. J Wild! Dis
14:441-444, 1978.

Conboy GA, O’Brien TD, Stevens DL: A natural infec-
tion of Fascioloides magna in a llama (Lama glama),
J Parasitol 74:345-346, 1988.

Cornick JJ: Gastric squamous cell carcinoma and fasci-
oliasis in a llama. Cornell Vet 78:235-241, 1988.
Foreyt WJ, Lagerquist J:
Eimeria alpacae and Eimeria punoensis in \lamas

(Llama glama). ] Parasitol 78:906-909, 1992.

Foreyt WJ, Rickard LG, Dowling S, Parish S, Pipas M:

Experimental infections of two llamas with the

 

xperimental infections of

meningeal worm (Parelaphostrongylus tenuis). ] Zoo
and Wildl Med 22:339-344, 1991.

Fowler ME: Medicine and surgery of South American
camelids: Llama, alpaca, vicuna, guanaco. lowa
State University Press, Ames, lowa, 1989.

Fowler ME, Paul-Murphy J: Cephenemyia sp. infesta-
tion in the llama. Calif Vet 39:10-12, 1985.

Hodgin C, Schillhorn van Veen TW, Fayer R, et al:
Leptospirosis and coccidial infection ina guanaco. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 185:1442-1444, 1984.

Kiorpes AL, Kirkpatrick CE, Bowman DD: Isolation of
Giardia from a llama and from sheep. Can J Vet Res
51:277-280, 1987.

Krogdahl DW, Thilsted JP, Olsen SK. Ataxia and hy-
permetria caused by Paralaphostrongylus tenuis in-
fection in llamas. | Am Vet Med Assoc
190:191-193, 1987.

Lunn DP, Hinchcliff K’
eosinophilia and atay
124:302-305, 1989.

O’Brien T, O’Leary TP, Leininger JR, et al.:
Cerebrospinal parelaphostrongylosis in Minnesota.
Minn Vet 26:18-22, 1986.

Rickard LG, Bishop JK: Prevalence of Eimeria spp.

 

Cerebrospinal fluid

  

ia in five llamas. Vet Rec

(Apicomp! imeriidae) in Oregon llamas. J
Protozool 35:335-336, 1988.

Rickard LG, Bishop JK: Redescription of Trichuris
tenuis Chandler, 1930 from llamas in Oregon (Lama

  

glama) with a key to the species of Trichuris present
in North American ruminants. | Parasitol 77:70-77,
1991.

Rickard LG, Bishop JK: Helminth parasites of llamas in
the Pacific Northwest. | Helminthol Soc Wash
58:110-115, 1991.

Riemann HP, Behymer D E, Fowler ME, et al.:
Prevalence of antibodies to Toxoplasma gondii in
captive exotic mammals. J Am Vet Med Assoc
165:798-800, 1974.

120
Section 7

PARASITES OF HORSES

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts

 

 

Relative es of
Equine Parasite Eggs

 

 

 

      
     
 

 

Oxyuris equi
Eimeria leuckarti ; 90 x 42um
76 x 52m Typical Strongyles

70-130 x 40-65 ym

   

Strongyloides westeri

 

~ 45 x35 ym
Anoplocephala SP. paranoplocephala
50— 80m mamillana
60 x 50m

ESS=>

Habronema muscae
Dictyocaulus arnfieldi (rare) 45 x lOum
300-480 x 16yum

 

Parascaris equorum
100 x 90yum

Fig. 149. Common parasite eggs and oocysts found in horse feces.

121
Section 7

Location of Major Parasites

Parasites of Horses

 

 

» Nuchal Ligament
[Anterior Mesenteric Artery Ectoparasites

Onchocerca cervicalis

‘Strongylus vulgaris Lice - Haematopinus

Eye . teva) Linognathus
Thelazia Damalinia
Ticks - Dermacentor

 

Ixodes
Mies - Psoroptes

Lungs
j Chorioptes

Rectum Flies - Stomoxys

 

Dictyocaulus arnfieldi

‘| : Oxyuris equi Culicoides
Simulium

   

 

Liver \
Fasciola hepatica haf ps ‘Small Intestine
Strongylus edentatus (Larva) Parascaris equorum
Cecum & Colon Strongyloides westeri
Stomach
[Stomach |] Sonus vgs Avoplocephala magne
Gastrophilus spp. Strong ylus edentatus Paranoplocephala mammilana
Draschia megastoma Strongylus equinus
Habronema spp ‘Small strongyles
Anoplocephala perfoliata

Trichostrongylus axei

Fig, 150. Locations of the major parasites found in horses.
Note: Micronema (Halicephalobus) deletrix larvae are in tissues. Adults are saprophytes.

122
Parasites of Horses

Zoonotic Diseases

Table 34. Major zoonotic diseases associated with horses—-uncommon

Organism Disease Method of Infection rf

 

 

Arthropods
Gastrophilus spp. Myiasis, Contact with adult fly
Lice Transient pediculosis Contact with infected horses

 

123
Section 7

Drugs

‘Table 35. Common names and sources of drugs used for deworming horses

 

 

 

 

 

Generic and Trade

Class Name Name Source Method

Avermectins
Ivermectin Eqvalan Merial Paste

Milbemycin
Moxidectin Quest Ft. Dodge Oral gel

Benzimidazoles
Fenbendazole Panacur Hoechst Feed, paste, stomach tube
Mebendazole Telmin Pitman-Moore Feed, paste, stomach tube
Mebendazole + trichlorfon Telmin-B Pitman- Moore Feed, paste, stomach tube
Oxfendazole Benzelmin Diamond Feed, stomach tube
Oxibendazole Anthelcide Norden Feed, paste, stomach tube
Oxibendazole Equipar Cooper Feed, paste, stomach tube

Phenylguanidines
Febantel Rintal Haver Feed, paste, stomach tube
Fenbendazole + trichlorfon Combotel Haver Paste

Imidothiazole

Levamisole + piperazine
Isoquinolenes

Praziquantel + ivermectin
Organophosphates

Dichlorvos

Dichlorvos

Trichlorfon
Piperazines

Piperazine

Piperazine-carbon disulfide

+ phenothiazine
Piperazine + Phenothiazine
+ trichlorfon

Pyrimidines

Pyrantel

Pyrantel
Other

Phenothiazine

Carbon disulfide

Ripercol-Piperazine

Equimax

 

Equigard

  

-quigel
Combot

 

Various.

Parvex Plus

  

Dyrex, Tl

Strongid-T or P
Imathal-Equine

Various.
Various

Beecham
Ft. Dodge
Squibb
Squibb
Haver
Various
Upjohn

Ft. Dodge

Phizer
Beecham

Various
Various.

Stomach tube

Paste

Feed

Paste

Paste, stomach tube
Stomach tube
Stomach tube

Stomach tube

Feed, paste, stomach tube
Feed, stomach tube

Feed, stomach tube
Stomach tube

 

124
Table 36, Antiparasitic compounds for major internal parasites of horses

Parasites of Horses

 

Average Removal Expectancy (%)

 

 

 

 

 

Dose Strongyles Toxicosis
Drug (mg/kg PO) Bots Ascarics vulgaris §. edentatis Small Oxyuris Factor
Avermectin
Ivermectin 0.2 95-100 90-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 72-100 6-10x
Milbemycin
Moxidectin 0.4 95-100 90-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 5x
Benzimidazoles
Fenbendazole 5-10 0 90-100 95-100 95-100 90-100 95-100 100x
Mebendazole 8.8 0 95-100 95-100 65-95 80-95 95-100 40x
Oxfencdazole 10 0 90-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 10x
Oxibendazole 10 0 90-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 90-100. 60x
Phenylguanidines (Pro-BZ)
Febantel 6 0 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 40x
Pyrimidines
Pyrantel 6.6 0 90-100 95-100 67-75 90-100 60-70 20x
Piperazines
Piperazine 88 0 95-100 40-60 0-10 90-100 40-60 3x
Organophosphates
Dichlorvos 10-35 80-100 90-100 0-100 70-80 85-95 90-100 2-3x
Trichlorfon 40 95-100 95-100 0 0 0 95-100 Ix
Imidothiazole
Levamisole + 8488 0 95-100 95-100 60-70 90-100 30-40 3x
piperazine
Phenothiazine
Phenothiazine 4.4-55 0 0 50-100 20-100 85-100 0 Ix
Combinations
Mebendazole + 8.8 + 40 95-100 95-100 95-100 65-95 80-95 95-100 Ix
trichlorfon
Febantel + 6+35 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 Ix
trichlorfon
Piperazinescarbon 58 +52+18 65-75 95-100 90-100 70-90 90-100 50-70 4x
disulfide +
phenothiazine
Piperazine + 88 +28+40 95-100 95-100 95-100 30-50 90-100 90-100 Ix
phenothiazine +
trichlorfon
Carbon disulfide 53 90-100 50-100 0 0 0 0 Ix

 

*Toxicosis factor is the level above the recommended dosage that has been shown to produce toxic effects.

(See Courtney and Sundlof,

1991.)

125
Section 7

 

Fig. 15a. Strongylus spp. (S. vulgaris, S. edentatus, S
equinus). Prepatent period is 200-332 days.

   

x

B.S

So strongyles
" Zo
Sees

Fig. 152a. Small strongyles (cyathostomes). Prepatent peri-
od is 40 days.

 

Oxyuris equi

Fig. 153a. Oxyuris equi. Prepatent period is 5 months.

126

Internal Parasites

Strongylus vulgaris

Common name: Large strongyle (Strongyloidea),

Size of adult; 14-24 mm in large intestine and cecum.
Size of egg: 90 jim x 50 jun.

Importance: Larval migration causes formation of
ancurysms and infarcts of intestinal circulation,

which may be fatal. Adults may cause anemia.

  
  

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation, Necropsy shows

aneurysm of cranial mesenteric artery.

 

Identification of larvae that have hatched in feces
achieved by using Bacrmann apparatus.
Treatment:
Larvae: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg, PO
Moxidectin, 0.4 mg/kg, PO
Adults: Fenbendazole, 5 mg/kg, PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO
(Most equine wormer:

 

v effective.)

 

Species of Cyathostomum, Cylicocyclus,
Cylicocephalus, Gyalocephalus, etc.

Common name: Small strongyle or eyathostome

 

(Strongyloidea).
Size of adult: 7-25 mm in large intestine and cecum,
Size of

 

90 yum x 50 ym.

Importance; Cause unthriftiness and periodic enteritis
due to local migrations.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation, Identification of lar-
vae that have hatched in feces achieved with a
Baermann apparatus.

Treatment: Benzimidazole/piperazine (see Table 36)

Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO
Moxidectin, 0.4 mg/kg PO
Piperazine, 5-7 9/100 Ib PO
Pyrantel pamoate, 6.6 mg/kg, PO

 

Oxyuris equi

Common name: Pinworm (Oxyuroidea).

Size of adult: 9-150 mm.

Size of egg: 90-100 jim x 40-50 jum in colon and ree-
tum.

Importance: Pruritus of anal region, tail rubbing, and
behavioral problems. ‘These worms do not infect
other animals.

Diagnosis: Gather eggs by placing cellophane tape
across anus; microscopic demonstration of eggs.

5 in Fecal flotation.

 

Treatment: Moxidectin, 0.4 mg/kg PO
Piperazine, 5.7 g/100 Ib. PO
Pyrantel, 12.5 mg/kg PO

 
Parasites of Horses

 

Fig. 152b. Heavy infection of stongyles. Fig. 152c. Typical strongyle egg (arrow) next to Parascaris
egg.

 

i oh ee

x yuris equi (arrows). Other eggs are Fig. 153c. Oxyuris equi (arrow) next to strongyle egg.
strengyles and Parascaris.

   

127
Section 7

 

Gastrophilus spp.

   
 

Parascaris equorum

Fig. 155a. Parascaris equorumt Prepatent period is 12
weeks.

 

Habronema spp.

Fig. 156a. Habronema spp. Prepatent period is 2 months.

128

Gastrophilus spp.

 

Common name: Bot tly (Diptera).

Approximately 2 em in stomach.

 

Size of larva

 

Importance: Generally nonpathogenic; rarely may cause
perforating gastric ulcers. “Worry factor” due to
buzzing of female fly as she oviposits.

 

Diagnosis: Yellow eggs on hair of legs, face. At necrop-
sy larvae are at pyloric or cardiac region of stom-
ach.

Treatment: Carbon disulfide, 5.3 ml/100 kg PO

Dichlorvos, 10 mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO
Moxidectin, 0.4 mg/kg PO
Frichlorfon, 40 mg/kg, PO

Remove all eggs as soon as they: are laid.

Parascaris equorum

Ascarid or roundworm (Ascaridoidea).
20 em in small intestine.

Common nam

  
 

Size of adult: 15
Size of egg: 100 pum.

Importance: Migrating larvae damage liver and lungs.

 

Foals may show intermittent diarrhea and consti-
pation or colic,

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.

   

Treatment: Fenbendazole, 5 mg/kg, PO
Piperazine, 5-7 g/100 Ib PO x 1/2 dose ar 3-4 mo;
full dose at 4-5 mo (100-200 mg/kg)
Pyrantel pamoate, 6.6 mg/kg PO
Mebendazole, 8.8 mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO
Moxidectin, 0.4 mg/kg PO
Prevention: Regular worming schedule and proper
management.

Habronema spp.

Common name: Stomach worm (Spiruroidea).

Size of adult: 10-15 mm in stomach.

Size of egg: 50-80 fm x 10-20 jum,

Importance: Migrating, larvae cause cutaneous granulo-
matous lesions (“summer sores”) and ulcerative
conjunctivitis. Adults may contribute to gastric
tumors and may cause gastritis.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation or skin scraping of le-

 

sion may contain larvae in summer sores.

 

Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO
Moxidectin, 0.4 mg/kg PO
Parasites of Horses

 

Fig. 155b. Parascaris equorum.

      

 

Fig. 156c. Habronema sp.

156b. Habronema sp.

129
A

Section 7

  

)
|
a

“~—@—Po

Fig. 157a. Strongyloides westeri. Prepatent period is 7-10
days.

 

Anoplocephala spp. ®

Ge —

Fig. 158a. Anoplocephala spp. Prepatent period is 2
months.

 

Fig. 1592. Bahesia spp. Incubation is 10-30 days.

130

Strongyloides westeri

Common name: Threadworm (Rhabditoidea).
Size of adult: 5-10 mm in small intestine.
Size of egg: 50 4m.

 

Importance: Acute diarrhea in foals 1-3 weeks old;
coughing due to lung migration. Zoonotic disease
potential.

Diagnosis: Larvated eggs in fecal flotation.

Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO

Oxibendazole, 10 mg/kg PO

Anoplocephala spp.

Common name: Tapeworm (Anoplocephalidac).
Size of adult: Up to 80 cm in small intestine.
jum x 50 pm.

 

May cause ulceration and inflammation of

Importane

ileocecal valve area; generally nonpathogenic.
Diagnosis: Identification of segments on feces or eggs in
fecal flotations.
Treatment: Albendazole, 25 mg/kg PO
Mehendazole, 15 mg/kg, PO
Pyrantel pamoate, 13 mg/kg PO (double dose)

 

Praziquantel, 1.5 mg/kg, and Ivermectin,
PO (Equimax™)

.2 mg/kg

Babesia spp.

Common name: (Apicomplexa).

Size of trophozoites: 2-4 ttm long in red blood cells.

Importance: Persistent fever, anemia, icterus, and
splenomegaly.

Diagnosis: Microscopic exam of blood smear.

Treatment: Phenamidine, 9 mg/kg IM q 24 hx 2d

Prevention: Tick control.
Parasites of Horses

 

      

Cd

  

: ao Fe
Fig. 158b. Anoplocepbala sp.

 

   

Fig. 159c. Babesia sp. (arrows).

131

 
Section 7

External Parasites

 

Fig, 159d. Dermacentor albipictus, adult male on left, adult female on right. Common on large animals in winter.

Table 37. Major drugs for control of external parasites in horses

 

Drug (Trade Name)

Parasites

Application

 

Organophosphates
Coumaphos (Co-Ral)
Crotoxyphos (Ciodrin)
Diazinon
Dichlorvos (Vapona)
Dioxathion (Korlan-ronnel)
Malathion (Cythion)
Trichlorfon (Neguvon)

Carbamates
Carbaryl (Sevin)

Organochlorines
Lindane
Methoxychlor (Marlate)

Pyrethroids
Fenvalerate (Ectrin)
Permethrin (Atroban, Expar)

Miscellaneous
Carbon disulfide
Ivermectin (Eqvalan)
Moxidectin (Quest)
Pyrethrins

Flies, lice, ticks,
Ticks, mites, lice, flies
ies, lice, keds, ticks
Flies, stomach bots

Fl

 

ies, keds, lice, ticks

   

 

ies, lice, keds, mites, ticks
Flies, lice, mites, stomach bots

Lice, mites, ticks

Flies, lice, mites, ticks
Flies, lice, mites, ticks

Lice, mites, ticks
Ticks, flies

Stomach bots

Lice, mites, stomach bots
Lice, mites, stomach bots
Flies

 

Spray, dust

Dust, spray

Dust, spray

Resin granules, resin strips, spray
Spray

Dust, spray

Oral, injectable, spray

Dust, spray

Dust, spray
Dust, spray

Spray
Spray

Oral
Oral
Oral
Spray

 

Note: Read label directions carefully. The label is the most authoritative source of information.

132
Table 38. Common external parasites on horses

Parasites of Horses

 

Genus and Species
Lice

Bovicola (Damalinia) equi Biting louse
Haematopinus asini, Microthoracius sp. Sucking lou:
Flies

Musca domestica House tly
Face fly
Horn fly
Stable fl

Musca antumnalis
Sipbona (Haematobia)

 

Stomoxys calcitrans
Tabanus and Chryops spp-
Mosquitoes

Hypoderma spp.

Mites
Sarcoptes scabiei
Psoroptes equi
Chorioptes bovis

Dry mange

Demodex sp.

Ticks
See listings under cattle, ‘Table 31

Common Name

se

Horse fly/deer fly
Several species
Cattle grubs

Seale and wet mange
Tail and hock mange
Nodular mange

Figure Number

Fig. 126, 145
Fig. 125, 127, 146

NeRON
Roeseet

 

- 116

 

Fig.
ki

 

 

Bibliography
Internal Parasites

Baker NE, Miller JE, Madigan JE, et al.: Anthelmintic
action of ivermectin, oxibendazole and pyrantel
pamoate against thiabendazole-resistant small
strongyles of horses. Equine Pract 6:8-19, 1984.

Bello TR: Alternative antiparasitic treatment of horses
with pyrantel pamoate suspension and ivermectin

oral solution compared with horses treated only:
Eq Vet Sci 16:166-170,

 

with ivermectin solution. |
1996.

Bello TR, Abell JE: Are equine tapeworms an emerging
disease? A retrospective study. J Eq Vet Sci
19:723-727, 1999.

Bello TR, Laningham ET: A controlled trial evaluation

 

of three oral dosages of moxidectin against equine
parasites. | Eq Vet Sci 14:483-448, 1994,
Benton RE, Lyons E

 

Survey in central Kentucky for
prevalence of Anoplocephala perfoliata in horses at
necropsy in 1992. Vet Parasitol 55:81-86, 1994.

Blackwell NJ: Colitis in equines associated with
strongyle larvae. Vet Rec 93:40 1-402, 1973.

Brown P, Clayton HM: The pathological changes in the

 

livers of foals experimentally infected with
115-123,

 

Parascaris equorum, | Comp Pathol §
1979.

Clayton HIM, Dunean JL:

 

:xperimental Parascaris

133

equorum infection of foals. Res Vet Sci 23:109-114,
1977.

ton HM, Dunean Jl
Parasearis equornm infection in worm-free pony
foals and yearlings. Vet Parasitol 4:69-78., 1978.
ton LIM, Duncan JL: The migration and develop-

 

Cla

ted with

   

Clinical signs associ

 

ment of Parascaris equornm. Int | Parasitol
9:285-292, 1979,
Courtne

 

CH, Asquith RL: Seasonal changes in pasture

    

y by equine cyathostomes in north central
Florida, Equine Vet | 17:240-242, 1985.

Courtney CH, Sundlof SE: Veterinary: Antiparasitic
Drugs, A Comprehensive Compenium of EDA-
Approved Antiparasitic Drugs, Am Assoc Vet
Parasitologists, Puh SP96, University of Horida, 224
pages, 1991.

Craig TM, Kunde JM: Controlled evaluation of iver-
meetin in Shetland ponies. An | Ver Res
42:1422-1424, 1981.

DiPietro JA, Paul A, Todd KS, et al: Controlled trials
of fenbendazole and febantel in ponies with
Parascaris equorum infections. | Equine Vet Sei
4:158-160, 1984.

Drudge JH, Lyons EF; ‘Tolliver $C: Controlled tests of

 

activity of ivermectin against natural infections of
migratory large strongyles and other internal para
sites of equids. Am J Vet Res 45:2267-2271, 1984.
Drudge JH:

 

‘linical aspects of Strongylus vulgaris in-
Section 7

fection in the horse. Emphasis on diagnosis,
chemotherapy, and prophylasis. Ver Clin North Am
Large Anim Pract 1:251-265, 1979.

Duncan JL, Pirie HM: The life cycle of Strongylus vul-
garis in the horse. Res Vet Sci 13:374-379, 1972.
Duncan JL, Pirie FLY
perimental infections with Strongyles vulgaris in

foals. Res Vet Sei 18:82-93, 1975.
Eysker J, Jansen J, Mirck MH: Inhibited development

 

: The pathogenesis of single ex-

of Cyathostominae in the horse in the early third
356, 1984.
‘apeworms of the equine

 

stage. Res Vet Sci 37:355

French DD, Chapman MR: ‘T
gastrointestinal tract. Compend Contin Ed Pract Vet
14:655-661, 1992.

Giles C], Urquhart KA, Longstaffe JA: Larval eyathos-
tomiasis (immature Trichonema-induced enteropa-

  
  

thy); A report of 15 clinical cases. Equine Vet |
17:196-201, 1985.
ireiner EC, Lane 1

   

 

Effects of the daily feeding of

 

pyrantel tartrate on Anoplocephala infections in
three horses: A pilot study. | Eq Vet Sci 14:43-44,
1994,

Herd RP, Willardson KL, Gabel AA: Epidemiologic ap-
proach to the control of horse strongyles. Equine
Ver | 17:202-207, 1985.

Herd RP, Donham JC: Efficacy of ivermectin against
cutaneous Draschia and Habronema infection (sum-
mer sores) in horses. Am J Vet Res 42:1953-1
1981.

Herd RP, Donham JC: Eff
Onchocerea cervicalis microfilaria dermatitis in hors-
es. Am J Vet Res 44:1 102-1105, 1983.

Herd RP, Willardson KL: The seasonal distribution of

 

of ivermectin against

 

infective strongyle larvae on horse pastures. Equine
Vet | 17:235-237, 1985.

Hutchens DE, Paul AJ, DiPietro JA: Treatment and
control of gastrointestinal parasites. Vet Clin North

2561-573, 1999.

Jranulomatous colitis associated

   

 
 

Am Eq Pract 1S
Jasko DJ, Roth L:
with small strongyle larvae in a horse. | Am Vet

Med Assoc 185:553-554, 1984.

Jordan ME, Courtey CH: Equine tapeworm. Eq Prac
21:10-14, 1999.

Kivipelto J, Nicklin C, Asquith RIz A comparison of
two programs (pyrantel tartrate administered daily

 

 

and 3x pyrantel pamoate administered at 8-week in-
tervals) for the reduction of tapeworm EPG in the
horse. J Eq Vet Sei 18:125-128, 1998.

Klei TR, Chapman MR, French DD, ct al: Evaluation
of ivermectin at ain clevated dose against equine ey-
athostome larvae. Vet Parasitol 47:99-106, 1993.

Klei TR, Torbert Bk: Efficacy of ivermectin (22,23-dihy-
dro-avermectin By) against parasites in ponies. Ant |
Vet Res 41:1747-1750, 1980.

134

 

Lichtenfels JR: Helminths of dome:

 

ic equids.
Mlustrated keys to genera and species with emphasis
on North American forms, Proc Helminthol Soc
Wash 42 (special issue):1-92, 1975.

Little SE: Adule tapeworms in horses: clinical signifi-
cance. Comp Contin Ed Pract Vet 21:356-360,
1999, ,

Lyons ET, Drudge JH, Tolliver $C: Antiparasitic activi-
ty of ivermectin in critical tests in equids. Am | Vet
Res 41:2069-2072, 1980.

Lyons FT, Drudge JH, Tolliver $C: Ivermectin: Activity
against larval Strongylus enlgaris and
Iriclostrongylus axei in experimental infections in
ponies. Am J Vet Res 43:1449-1450, 1982.

Lyons ET, Drudge JH, Tolliver SC: Controlled tests
with fenbendazole in equids: Special interest on ac-

ctions of

 

tivity of multiple doses against natural inf

 

migrating stages of strongyles. Am J Vet Res
44:1058-1063, 1983.

Lyons ET, Drudge JH, Tolliver $C, et al: Pyrantel
pamoate: Evaluating its activity against equine tape-
worms. Ver Med 81:280-285, 1986.

Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Drudge JH: Prevalence of some

  

internal parasites recovered at necropsy of thorough
breds born in 1982 in Kentucky. Am J Vet Res
46:679-68 3, 1985.

Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Drudge JH: Further evaluation
of pyrantel pamoate at the therapeutic dose rate (6.6
ing base/ky) against Anoplocephala perfoliata in
horses. | Helminthol Soc Wash 64:285-287, 1997.

Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Drudge JI, Gr
al: Activity of praziquantel against Anoplocepbala
perfoliata (Cestoda) in horses. | [Helminthol Soc
Wash 50:1-4, 1992.

Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Ennis L.

 

 

anstrom DE, et

 

Efficacy of praziquan-
tel (0.25 mg/kg-!) on the cecal tapeworm
(Anoplocephala perfoliata) in horses. Vet Parasitol
78:287-289, 1998.

Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Stamper S, et al: Activity of
praziquantel (0.5 mg/kg!) against Anoploceplala
perfoliata (Cestoda) in equids. Vet Parasitol
56:255-257, 1995.

Monahan CM, Chapman MR, Taylor HW, et al:
Comparison of moxidectin oral gel and ivermectin
oral past against a spectrum of internal parasites of
ponies with special attention to encysted cyathos-

25-235, 1996.

Pearson GR, Davies IW, White AL, et al.: Pathological

tome larvae. Vet Parasitol 63:2

 

lesions associated with Anoplocephala perfoliata at
the ileo-cecal junction of horses. Ver Ree
132:179-182, 1993.

Proudman CJ, Edwards GB: Are tapeworms associated
with equine colic? A case control study. Eg Ver |
25:224-226, 1993.
Proudman CJ, French NP, Trees AJ: Tapeworm infec-
tion is a significant risk factor for spasmodic colic
and ileal impaction colic in the horse. Eq Vet |
30:194-199, 1998.

Proudman CJ, Swan JD, Trees AJ: Efficacy of pyrantel
embonate and praziquantel against the equine tape-
worm Anoplocephala mamillana. Vet Rec
137:45-46, 1995.

Proudman CJ, Trees AJ: Tapeworms as a cause of intes-
tinal disease in horses. Parasitol Today 15:156-159,
1999.

Rodriguez-Bertos A, Corchero J, Castano M, et a

 

Pathological alterations caused by Anoplocepbala
perfoliata infection at the ileocecal junction of
equids. | Vet Med 46:261-269, 1999.

Slocombe JOD, McCraw BM, Pennock PW, et al.:
Effectiveness of ivermectin against later 4th stage
Strongylus vulgaris in ponies. An | Vet Res
43:1525-1529, 1982.

Slocombe JOD, McCraw BM, Pennock PW, et al.
Effectiveness of fenbendazole against later 4th-stage
Strongylus vulgaris in ponies. Am J Vet Res
44:2285-2289, 1983.

Slocombe JOD, McCraw BM: Evaluation of pyrantel
pamoate, nitramisole and avermectin B, against mi-
grating Strongylus vulgaris larvae. Can J Comp Med
44:93-100, 1980.

Slocombe JOD: Pathogenesis of helminths in equines.
Vet Parasitol 18:139-153, 1985.

Torbert BJ, Kramer BS, Klei TR: Efficacy of injectable
and oral paste formulations of ivermectin against
gastrointestinal parasites in ponies. Am J Vet Res
43:145 11-1453, 19

Uhlinger C, Johnstone

   
 

‘ailure to reestablish benzim-
idazole susceptible populations of small strongyles
after prolonged treatment with non-benzimidazole
drugs. Equine Vet Sci. 4:7-9, 1984.

Wescott RB, Jen LW, Hellier LE, et al
binations of piperazine and fenbendazole against

 

Efficacy of com-

benzimidazole-resistant small strongyles in horses.
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 77:247-249, 1982.
Williamson RMC, Gasser RB, Middleton D, et al.: The
distribution of Anoplocephala perfoliata in the intes-

 

tine of the horse and associated pathological

changes. Vet Parasitol 73:225-241, 1997.
Yazwinski TA, Hamm D, Williams M, ct al.

ness of ivermectin in the treatment of equine

 

  

Fective-

Parascaris equorim and Oxyuris equi infections.
Am J Vet Res 43:1095, 1982.

Protozoan Parasites

Al-Khalidi NW, Dubey JP: Prevalence of Toxoplasma
sitol 65:33 1-334,

  

gondii infection in horses. J Par

135

Parasites of Horses

1979.

Al-Khalidi NW, Weisbrode
of Toxoplasma gondii oocysts to ponies. Am | Vet
Res 41:1549-1551, 1980.

Clark EG, Townsend HIGG, McKenzie NT:
tozoal mycloencephalitis: A report of two cases from
Western Canada. Can Vet J 22:140-144, 1981.

Dorr TE, Higgens RJ, Dangler CA, et al.: Protozoal
mycloencephalitis in horses in California. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 185:801-802, 1984.

Dubey JP: Toxoplasma, Hammondia, Besnoitia,
Sarcocystis and other tissue cyst-forming coccidia of

 

E, Dubey JP: Pathogenicity

   

     

Equine pro-

 

man and animals. In: Parasitic Protozoa. Volume 3.
New York, Academic Press, Inc. 1977, pp. 101-237.

Dubey JP, Davis GW, Koestner A, et al.: Equine en-
cephalomyelitis due to a protozoan parasite resem-
bling Toxoplasma gondii. | Am Vet Med Assoc
165:249-255, 1974.

Dubey JP, Streitel RH, Stromberg PC, et al: Sarcocystis
fayeri sp. n. from the horse. | Parasitol 63:443-447,
1977.

Dunlap JS: Himeria lenckarti infection in the horse. |
Am Vet Med Assoc 156:623-625, 1970.

Erber M, Geisel O: Prevalence and development of wo

  

 

Parasitenkd

 

Sarcocystis spp. in the horse.
65:283-291, 1981.
Eugster AK, Joyce JR: Prevalence and diagnostic signifi-

 

cance of Toxoplasma gondii antibodies in horses.
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 71:1469-1473, 1976.
Fayer R, Dubey JP: Development of Surcocystis fayeri
56-860, 1982.
Fayer R, Hounsel C, Giles RC: Chronic illness ina sar-
cocystis infected pony. Vet Rec 113:216-217, 1983.
Fenger CK, Granstrom DE, Gajadhar AA, et al.:
Experimental induction of equine protozoal

   

in the equine. | Parasitol 6

mycloencephalitis in horses using Sarcocystis sp.
sporocysts from the opossum (Didel phis virginiana).
Vet Parasitol 68:199-213, 1997.

Frechette JL, )
Can Vet J 13

  

rcoux M: Eimeria leuckarti in a colt.

95-96, 1974.

Kirkpatrick CE, Skand DL: Giardiasis in a horse. | Avr
Vet Med Assoc 187:163-164, 1985.

Kistner IP, Ah H-S, Hanson WL: Coccidial oocysts
from a horse in Georgia. | Parasitol 58:709, 1972.

Levine ND: Taxonomy and review of the coceidian

  
 
 
 

 
   

 

genus Cryptosporidium (Protozoa, Apicomplexa). |
Protozool 31:94-98, 1984.

MarKay RJ: Equine protozoal mycloencephalitis. Vet
Clin N Ant kq Pract 13:79-96, 1997.

Matuschka H
to horse via sporocysts from dogs. Z Parasitenkd
69:299-304, 1983.

McQueary CA, Worley DE, Catlin JE: Observations on
the life

 

 

Infectivity of sarcocystis from donkey

 

yele and prevalence of Eimeria leuckarti in
Section 7

horses in Montana. Anz J Vet Res 38:1673-1674,
1977.

Simpson CE, Mayhew IG: Evidence for Sarcocystis as

 

the etiologic agent of equine protozoal myclocn-
cephalitis. | Protozool 27:288-292, 1980.
Vetterling, JM, Thompson DE: Klossiella equi
Baumann, 1946 (Sporozoa Eucoccidia: Adeleina)
from equids. | Parasitol 58:589-594, 1972.

External Parasites

Besch ED, Griffiths IJ: Demonstration of Demodex
equi (Raillict, 1985) from a horse in Minnesota. |
Am Vet Med Assoc 155:82-83, 1956.

Drummond RO:
of arthropod pests of livestock. Southtest Entomol
(Suppl. 7):34-42, 1985.

Fadok VA; Parasitic skin diseases of large animals. Vet
Clin North Am Large Anim Pract 6:3-26, 1984.
Fadok VA, Mullowney P
horses. Part I. Parasitic dermatoses of the horse.

Compend Contin Ed Vet Pract 5:56 15-5623, 1983.

Kettle DS: Medical and Veterinary Entomology. New

York, John Wiley & Sons, 1984.

 

fectiveness of ivermectin for control

  

Dermatologic diseases of

136

Klei TR, Torbert B, Chapman MR, et al.: Prevalence of
Onchocerca cervicalis in equids in the Gulf Coast re-
gion. An | Vet Res 45:1646-1647, 1984.

Knapp FW: Arthropod pests of horses. In Williams,

RE, et al. (eds): Livestock Entomology. New York,
John Wiley & Sons, 1985.

Kunkle GA, Greiner F
caused by the straw itch mite. | Anz Vet Med Assoc
181:467-469, 1982.

Loomis EC:

Dermatitis in horses and man

 

 

Common ectoparasites and their control.
In Robinson, NE (ed): Current Therapy in Equine
Medicine. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1983.

Reinemeyer CR, Scholl PJ, Andrews EM, et al.: Efficacy

 

of moxidectin equine oral gel against endoscopically-
confirmed Gasterophilus nasalis and Gasterophilus
intestinalis (Diptera: Oestridae) infections in horses.
Vet Parasitol 88:287-29 1, 2000.

Scholl PJ, Chapman MR, French DD, et al: Efficacy of
moxidectin 2% oral gel against second- and third-in-
star Gasterophilus intestinalis De Geer. | Parasitol
84:656-657, 1998.

Scott DW, White KK: Demodicosis associated with sys-
temic glucocorticoid therapy in two horses. Equine
Pract 5:3 1-32, 1983.
  

Section 8

PARASITES OF PIGS

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts

RELATIVE SIZES
OF PIG PARASITE EGGS

©

Eimeria debliecki Isospora suis
Ascaris suum 19 x 16 ym 22 x 20yum

62 x 45ym

 

 

   

Tia
trophozoite

 

cyst

 

50yum

() 50m

Balantidium coli
30-150 x 25-120ym

 

Strongyloides ransomi
Ascarops strongylina

   

45 x 27m
36 x 20um
Oesophagostomum sp. Metastrongylus apri Trichuris suis
Macracanthorhynchus
80 x 40ym 50 x 40pm 55 x 23m hirudinaceus
80 x 52ym

Fig. 160. Common parasite eggs and oocysts found in pig feces.

137
Section 8

Location of Major Parasites

{ Stomach |
Hyostrongylus
Trichostrongylus
Ascarops
Physocephalus

 

 

 

 

Parasites of Pigs

Kidney

Stephanurus

 

 

Esophagus
> A 7
Gongylonema S
SS
ie \
Lungs
Metastrongylus
Liver
Fasciola
Ascaris (Larva)
Stephanurus (Larva)
Fig. 161. Location of the major parasites found in pigs.

138

Ectoparasites

 

Lice - | Haematopinus

Mites - Sarcoptes
Demodex

Flies - Musca
Muscle

 

 

 

" Taenia solium (Cysticercus)
38

Trichinella
PD Toxoplasma

(Larva)
(Pseudocyst)

 

\ Cecum & Colon |
Oesophagostomum

Trichuris

Small Intestine
Ascaris
Macracanthorhynchus
Globocephalus
Strongyloides
Parasites of Pigs

Zoonotic Diseases

Table 39. Major zoonotic parasites associated with pigs

 

 

 

Organism Disease Method of Infection
Protozoa
Sarcocystis suihomtinis Sarcosporidiosis Ingestion of raw meat
oplasma gondii Toxoplasmosis Ingestion of raw meat
‘Trypanosoma cruzi Irypanosomiasis Contact with arthropod vector
Nematodes
Ascaris sim Ascariasis Ingestion of larvated eggs
Strongyloides spp. Cutaneous larva migrans Contact with larvae
Trichinella spiralis Trichinosis Ingestion of raw meat

Cestodes

Taenia solinm Tacniasis-cysticercosis Ingestion of raw meat
Arthropods
Sarcoptes scabiei Acariasis Contact with infected pigs

 

   

Fig. 163. Trichinella spiralis,

Toxoplasma gondii

Fig. 162. To.woplasma gondii

139
Section 8

Drugs

Table 40. Efficacy of anthelmintics in swine

 

 

Efficacy against Parasites (%)

 

 

Oesopb-
Dose Ascaris agosto Trichuris  Metastron- Hyostrongylus Strongyloides
Drug (mg/kg PO) smn spp- suis gylus spp. rubidus ransomi
Piperazine 275-440 75-100 0 0 0 _ 0
Pyrantel Preventative: 96-100 99-100 0 0 _ 0
tartrate 96 ylton feed
Therapeutic:
800 g/ton feed
at I Ib. feed/
= 40 Ibs. BW,

repeat 75—

100 Ibs. BW
Hygromycin B12 g/ton feed 95-100 95-100 85-100 0 — _

to be fed

for 4-6 weeks
Dichlorvos 100 q 24h 92-100 95-100 90-100 0 99-100 60-87

x 30 d prior

to farrowing;

or 0.05% of

ration x2 d
Doramectin 0.3 mg/kg 100 99 80 100 99 99

(IM)
Levamisole 8 99-100 80-100 26-80 90-100 94-100 80-95 83
Fenbendazole = 3-25 q 24hx3d 92-100 100 66-100 97-100 99-100 0-98
Ivermectin 0.3 mg/kg 100 63-99 0-91 99-100 86-100 66-100

Stephanurus
dentatus
0

0

100

100

100

 

(See Courtney and Sundlof, 1991.)

140
Table 41. Major drugs for control of external parasites in pigs

Drug (Trade Name)
Organophosphates
Coumaphos (Co-Ral)
Crotoxyphos (Ciodrin)
Diazinon
Dioxathion (Delnay)
Fenchlorphos (Korlan-ronnel)
Fenthion (Tiguvon)
Malathion (Cythion)
Tetrachlorvinphos (Rabon)
Trichlorfon(Neguvon)

Organochlorines
Lindane
Methoxychlor (Marlate)
Toxaphene

Miscellaneous
Ivermectin (Ivomec)

Pyrethins
Pyrethroids

Parasites

Fleas, flies, lice, ticks,
Ticks, mites, lice, flies
Flies, lice, ticks
Flies,

Flies,

ice, ticks
ice, mites, ticks

Flies, lice
Fleas, flies, lice, mites, ticks
Flies, lice

Flies, lice, mites

Flies, lice, mites, ticks
Flies, lice, mites, ticks
Flies, lice, mites, ticks

Lice, mites

Flies, fleas, lice
Flies, fleas, lice

Parasites of Pigs

Application

Dip, spray, dust
Dust, spray
Dip, dust, spray
Dip, spray
Dust, spray
Pour-on

Dip, dust, spray
Dust, spray
Injectable, spray

Dust, spray
Dust, spray
Dip, dust, spray

Injectable (SC, IM)
or in feed

Spray

Spray

 

Note: Read label directions carefully. The label is the most authoritative source of information.

141
Section 8

 

Ascaris suum
@

Fig. 164a. Ascaris sian. Prepatent period is 8 w

ks.

 

Ss suis

   

Fig. 166a. Oesophagostonmm dentatum. Prepatent period
is 40 days.

 

142

Internal Parasites
Ascaris suum

Common name: Ascarid or roundworm (Ascaridoidea).
85 jum x $0 jum.
athogenicity varies. In young pigs, stunt-

Size of ¢
Importance:

 

 

ing and poor growth, coughing, “milk-spots” in
liver; iron-deficient pigs get “thumps”. In adults,
reduced weight gain, intestinal or bile duct block-
age, potential zoonotic disease.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. Adults found in small

 

intestine a
sy.
Treatment: Dichlorvos, 12-22 mg/kg PO
vt

nd “milk spots” in liver seen at necrop-

 

Doramectin, 0.3 mg/kg Iv

3
Fenbendazole, 3 mg/kg q 24h x 3d
Hygromycin B, 12 g/ton of feed

Ivermection, 0.3 IM, SC, or in feed

Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg PO (after overnight fast)

Piperazine, 110 mg/kg PO in feed or water

Trichuris suis

Common name: Whipworm (Frichuroidea).
Size of egg: 55 jim x 25 jun.

 

Importance: Stunting, bloody diarrhea, prolapse, poor

growth.

 

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation, Adults are found in
large intestine at necropsy:

Treatment: Change quarters.

mg/kg, PO

q24hx3d

Dichlorvos, 12-22

 

Fenbendazole, 3 mg/kg

Hygromycin B, 12 g/ton of feed

Ivermectin, 0.3 mg/kg IM, SC, or in feed (variable re-
sults)

Oesophagostomum dentatum

Common name: Nodular worm (Strongyloidea).

Size of egg: 70 pm x 40 jum.

Importane
enteritis; condemnation of intestines at slaughter.

 

: Nodules in gut wall may cause ill-thrift or

 

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. Adults in large intes-
tine at necropsy.
Treatment: Dichlorvos, 12-22 mg/kg PO
Doramectin, 0.3 mg/kg IM
Fenbendazole, 3 mg/kg q 24h x 3d
Hygromycin B, 12 g/ton feed
Ivermectin, 0.3 mg/kg IM, SC, or in feed
Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg PO (after overnight fast)
Pyrantel tartrate, 800 g/ton feed for | feeding per day

Prevention: Pyrantel tartrate, feed 96 g/ton daily.
  

Parasites of Pigs

 

Fig. 166c. Oesophagostomun dentatum.

143
Section 8

 

Fig. 167a. Strongyloides ransomi. Prepatent period is $-7
days.

 

Fig. 168a. Metastrongylus spp. Prepatent period is |
month,

 

Isospora suis

Fig. 169a. Isospora suis. Prepatent period is 2 weeks.

©

144

Strongyloides ransomi

 

Common name: Threadworm (Rhabditoidea).

 

Size of adults: 3-5 mm.

Size of egg: 50 jum x 30 ym.

Importance: In piglets, acute mucoid enteritis and bloody
diarrhea, transmammary oral or percutancous
transmission. Emaciation and anemia results in
stunting; 70-80% mortality results in severe eco-

nomic loss. In adult pigs, mangelike symptoms.

 

 

Diagnosis: Fecal flotation. At necropsy mucosal serap-
ings of small intestine contain adult females.
Treatment: Management.
Dichlorvos, | g/sow q 24 h for last 30 days of gestation
tin, 0.3 mg/kg IM

Ivermectin, 0.3 mg/kg, SC, or in feed

Dorami

 

 

Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg, PO (after overnight fast)

Prevention: Proper management.

Metastrongylus spp.

Common name: Lungworm (Metastrongyloidea).

 

Size of adults: 2-5 em.
Size of egg: 55 wm x 40 um.

 

Importance: Coughing, poor growth. Lungworms en-

hance other disea:

 

Diagnosis: Larvated eggs in fecal flotation. At necropsy
adults are found in lungs and areas of consolida-
tion at the tips of the diaphragmatic lobes of the
lungs.

Treatment: Fenbendazole, 3 mg/kg q 24h x 3d

Doramectin, 0.3 mg/kg IM

Ivermectin, 0.3-0.5 mg/kg IM, SC, or in feed

 

Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg PO (after overnight fast)

Isospora suis

Common name: Coccidia (Apicomplexa).
: 16-20 pun x 19-22 un.
Importance: In piglets, diarrhea and decreased weight

Size of oocy

  

gain, Adults are r

 

sistant carriers.

 

Diagnosis: Oocysts in fecal flotation. (Test must be r

 

peated; may not shed oocyts until 10 days after in-

fection.) Oocysts in intestines seen histologically.

 

Treatment: Decoquinate, | mg/kg q 24 h x 21 d to sows
before and after farrowing.

Sulfamethazine 0.5% in feed, or 130 mg/kg PO then 65
mg/kg q 12 hx 4d

 

Prevention

 

: Proper management.
 

    

Fig. 169b. Isospora suis (arrowheads). Fig. 169c. Isospora suis.

145
Section 8

 

>
i
NN Eimeria spp. /

O@—_

Fig. 170. Eimeria spp. Prepatent period is 7 days.

 

 

= ¢ Ascarops strongylina O/
ert >
et

Fig. 171, Ascarops strongylina, Prepatent period is 6
weeks.

 

Fig. 172. Hyostrongylus rubidus. Prepatent period is 3
weeks,

146

Eimeria spp.

Common name: Coccidia (Apicomplexa).
Size of oocyst: 15-25 fm.

 

Importance: Similar to [sospora spp., but not as patho-
genic.
Diagnosis: Oocysts in feces; very similar to Isospora

 

 

spp. Oocysts found in intestine at necropsy.

 

Treatment: Decoquinate | mg/kg q 24 h x 21 d to sows
before and after farrowing (also for prevention).
Sulfamethazine, 0.5% in Feed, or 130 mg/kg PO, then
65 mgky q IZhx4d
Prevention: Proper management.

Ascarops strongylina

Common name: Stomach worm (Spiruroidea).

Size of egg: 20 yum x 40 jum.

Importance: Dung beetle is intermediate host.
Nonpathogenic, unless present in large numbers;

causes gastritis in adult pigs.

 

 

Diagnosis: Fecal sedimentation shows embryonated
ova. Eggs do not float well. Adults found in stom
ach at necropsy

Treatment: Dichlorvos, 12-22 mg/kg PO

Doramectin, 0.3 mg/kg IML
Ivermectin, 0.3 mg/kg IM, SC, or in Feed
Prevention: Proper management.

Hyostrongylus rubidis

Common name: Stomach worm (Trichostrongyloidea).

 

Size of adults: I cm.

Size of egg: 65 ktm x 35 yum; these do not float well.

Importance: May cause anemia, poor appetite, gastritis,
and melena due to invasion of gastric glands.

Diagnosis: Fecal flotation shows larvated ova. At
necropsy adults are thin red worms in gastric mu-
cosa.

Treatmer

  

Dichlorvos, 12-22 mg/kg PO
Doramectin, 0.3 mg/kg IM
Ivermectin, 0.3 mg/kg, IM
    

Macracanthorhy nchus hirudinaceus

——

Fig. 173. Macracanthorbynchus hiridinaceus, Prepatent
period is 3-4 months.

eS

 

Fig. 174. Gongylonema sp. Prepatent period is unknown

 

Fig. 175, Stephanurus dentatus. Prepatent period is 8-16
months,

147

Parasites of Pigs

Macracanthorhynchus hirudinaceus

Common name: Spiny-headed worm, thorny-headed
worm (Acanthocephala).

Size of egg: 100 um x 50 jum.

Importance: Uncommon in USA. May cause peritonitis.
The head is firmly embedded in the mucosa.

cal flotation. Adults are found attached to

 

Diagnos'
the small intestine at necropsy.

Treatment: Dichlorvos, 10 mg/kg PO

Prevention: Keep pigs off dirt, away from beetles.

Gongylonema sp.

Common name: Gullet or esophageal worms
(Spiruroidea).

Size of egg: 58 jum x 32 ym.

Importance: Relatively nonpathogenic.

gs occasionally in feces. Adults found in

 

Diagnos
mucosa of esophagus at necropsy.
Treatment: None known.

Stephanurus dentatus

Common name: Swine kidney worm (Strongyloidea).
Size of egg: 100 ym x 60 pm.

  

Importance: Loss of weight.
Diagnosis: Eggs are in urine. At necropsy adults are

found in cysts in perirenal fat and pelvis of kid-
ney. Larvae found in fiver.

Treatment: Use uninfected gilts for breeding.

IM, SC, or in feed

  

Ivermectin, 0.3-0.5 n
Doramectin, 0.3 mg/kg IM
Section 8

  
    

  
   

(

Se

 

So —

Fig. 176. Trichinella spiralis, Twenty days for larvae to be
infective. Larvae to adult in 4 days.

 

Taenia solium

Fig. 177. Taenia solium. Prepatemt period is 2 months.

 

Balantidium coli

 

Dan

Fig. 178. Balantidium coli. Lile cycle is 6-14 days.

\ oe spiralis ay
A a “
ul

148

Trichinella spiralis

Common name: Trichina worm (Trichuroidae).
100- 1,300 jun x 6-40 jim.
: Infects all animals, especially wildlife.

 

Size of larva

 

Importane

Diagnosis: In humans, death, stiffness, muscle pain.
Detection of larvae in muscle biopsy by squeezing mus-
cle between two glass slides, or digesting muscle in 1%

 

acid pepsin solution. Eosinophilia is supportive in a di-
agnosis. Serologic tests and skin tests are helpful.
Histology: (See Fig. 233.)
Treatment:
Humans:
Albendazole, 20 mg/kg q 24h x 5-7 days
Mebendazole, 50 mg/kg q 8 hx 10+ d
Corticosteroids in severe disease
Pigs: None
Prevention: Do not feed uncooked garbage to pigs. Cook all
meat to 77°C (170°) or 66°C for 3 minutes. Freeze
meat to -15°C (5°E) for 21 days, -23°C (-10°F) for 10
days, or 30°C (-22°F) for 6 days.
Note: Trichinella in wildlife is not killed by freezing.

Taenia solium

Common name: Pork tapeworm (‘Taeniidac). Adults only in
humans.

Size of egg: 35 x 25 pm.

Importance: Cysticerci are in pig skeletal and cardiac muscle.
When eaten by humans, the adult tapeworm develops.
Humans also can develop cysticercosis. No major path-
ogenicity in pigs.

Diagnosis: Observation of cysticerci in pigs at necropsy;
serological tests in humans and pigs, eggs in feces of in-
fected humans.

Treatment: In humans: Niclosamide, adults 2 g; children
10-15 g.

Prevention: Management to prevent pig ingestion of human
feces. Cook pork to 45-50e2C (113-1220) for 20
minutes. Freeze pork to -10e2C (142) for 4 days.

Balantidium coli

Common name: None (Ciliophora).

Size of trophozoite: 30-150 jim.

Size of cyst: 40 to 60 jum.

Importance: Pig is the usual host, usually considered a com-
mensal, but can cause mild to severe enteritis. This is a
zoonotic infection.

Diagnosis: Clinical signs, and large numbers of organisms in
fecal flotation or smear. Lesions seen at necropsy.

Treatment: In humans: Metronidazole, 750 mg q 8 hx 5d

Pigs: Tetracycline antibiotics (200 mg/gal H,O)
Parasites of Pigs

 

___External Parasites

 

Haematopinus suis

 

Fig. 179a. Life cycle of Haematopinus suis.

Haematopinus suis Fig. 179b. Haematopinus suis

Common name: Hog louse (Insecta-Anoplura).
Size of adult: S-7 mm. Life cycle is 3-4 weeks.

Importance: Irritation, anemia, may transmit Eperythrozoan suis (a rickettsia).
amination of skin for adult eggs, nymphs, and adult lice.

 

Diagnosis:
Treatment: Amitraz, coumaphos, crotoxyphos, diazinon, dioxathion, fenchlorphos, fenvalerate, ivermectin, lindane,
malathion, methoxychlor, phosmet, permethrin, pyrethrum, pyrethrins, pyrethroids, tetrachlorvinphos, trichlorfon.

  

Sarcoptes scabiei

Fig. 180b. Sarcoptes scabiei.

Fig. 180a. Sarcoptes scabiei.

Sarcoptes scabiei

Common name: Mange mite (Arachnida-Sarcoptidae).

Size of adult: 350-450 pm. Life cycle is 3 weeks.

Importance: Irritation, anemia, weight loss, constant scratching, and self mutilation.

Diagnosis: Skin scraping

‘Treatment: Amitraz, crotoxyphos, fenchlorphos, fenvalerate, ivermectin, lindane, methoxychlor, permethrin, phosmet,
toxaphene.

149

 
Section 8

Table 42. List of common external parasites of pigs

 

Lice

Flies

Genus and Species Common Name Figure
Haematopinus suis Sucking louse Fig. 179
Musca domestica House fly Fig. 121

Fleas

Pulex irritans Human flea
Tunga penetrans Digger flea
Ticks

Dermacentor spp. Wood ticks
Ixodes scapularis Black-legged tick
Amblyomma spp. Southern ticks
Mites

Sarcoptes scabiei

Demodex phylloides

Mange mite
Follicle mite

 

Figs. 128-131
Figs. 128-131
Figs 128-131

Fig. 180
Fig. 47

 

Bibliography

Batte EG: A review and update of swine parasite con-
trol. J Am Vet Med Assoc 170:343-344, 1977.

Bennett DG, and Copeman DB: Gastrointestinal
helminth infections in feeder pigs. Am J Vet Res
31:1093-1096, 1970.

Cargill CF, and Dobson K
scabiei infestation in pigs: (1) Pathogenesis Vet Rec
104:11-14, 1979.

2B, and Dobson KJ:
scabiei infestation in pigs: (2) Effects on production.
Vet Rec 104:33-36, 1979.

Courtney CH, Sundlof SE: Veterinary Antiparasitic
Drugs, A Comprehensive Compendium of FDA-
Approved Antiparasitic Drugs, American

 

xperimental Sarcoptes

 

Cargill xperimental Sarcoptes

Association of Veterinary Parasitologists, Publication
SP96, University of Florida, Gainesville, 224 Pages,
1991.

Foreyt WJ, Todd AC, Foreyt KM: Fascioloides magna
(Bassi, 1875) in feral swine from southern Texas. J
Wildl Dis 11:554-559, 1975.

Lindsay DS, Current WI, Ernst JV, et al.: Diagnosis of
neonatal porcine coccidiosis caused by Isospora suis.
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 78:89-95, 1983.

Lindsay DS, Ernst JV, Current WL, et al.: Prevalence of
oocysts of Isospora suis and Eimeria spp. from sows
on farms with and without a history of neonatal
coccidiosis. | Arm Vet Med Assoc 185:419-421,
1984.

150

Lindsay DS, Current WL, and ‘Taylor JR: Effects of ex-
perimental Isospora suis infection on morbidity,
mortality, and weight gains of nursing pigs. Am |
Vet Res 46:1511-15 12, 1985.

Logan NB, Weatherley AJ, Jones RM: Activity of do-
ramectin against nematode and arthropod parasites
of swine. Vet Parasit 66:87-94, 1997.

Lord, WD, and Bullock WL: Swine ascariasis in hu-
mans. N Engl J Med 306:1113, 1982.

Marti OG, Stewart TB, and Hale OM: Comparative ef-

  

ficacy of fenbendazole, dichlorvos, and levamisole
HCL against gastrointestinal nematodes of pigs. |
Parasitol 64: 1028-1031, 1978.

Murrell KD, Gamble HR, and Schad GA: Experimental
transmission of Trichinella spiralis to swine by in-
fected rats. Proc [Helminthol Soc Wash 51:66-70,
1984.

Polley LR, and Mostert Ascaris suvon in

 

Saskatchewan pigs: An abattoir survey of prevalence
3307-309,

 

and intensity of infection. Can Vet | 2
1980.

Schad GA, Kelly M, Leiby DA, et al. Trichinella spi-
ralis in Mid-Atlantic slaughterhouses: Relationship
to hog marketing systems. Prev Ver Med 3:39 1-399,
1985.

Schantz PM: Trichinosis in the United States,
1947-1981, Food Technol 37:83-86, 1983.

Schillhorn van Veen TW, and Gibson CD: Anthelmintic

 

activity of ivermectin in pigs naturally infected with
Ascaris and Trichuris. Am ] Vet Res 44:1732-1733,
1983.
 

Sheahan BJ: Experimental Sarcoptes scabiei infection in
pigs: Clinical signs and significance of infection. Ver
Rec 94:202-209, 1974.

Sheahan BJ, O'Connor PJ, and Kelly EP:
weight gains in pigs following treatment for sarcop-

169-170, 1974.

fFects of external and internal arthro-

 

Improved

 

tic mange. Ver Ree 9

Steelman C
pod parasites on domestic livestock production. Ann
Rev Entomol 21:155-178, 1976.

Stewart TB, Fox MC, Miles SE: Doramectin efficacy
against gastrointestinal nematodes in pigs. Ver
Parasitol 66:101-108, 1996.

Stewart TB, Marti OG, and I lale OM: Efficacy of fen-
bendazole against five genera of swine parasites. Am
J Vet Res 42:1 150-1162, 1981.

Stewart TB, Marti MS, and Hale OM:
mectin against five genera of swine nematodes and

 

 

 

icacy of iver-

the hog louse, Hematopinus suis, Am J Vet Res
42:1425-1426, 1981

151

Parasites of Pigs

 

Stewart TB, Marti OG, and McCormick WC: Efficacy

of ivermectin against the swine kidney worm,
Stephanurus dentatus. Am J Vet Res 42:1427-14.
1981

Stewart TB, Marti OG, and McCormick WC: Efficacy
of fenbendazole against the swine kidney worm,
Stephanurus dentatus. Am | Vet Res 42:1627-1629,
1981.

Stewart TB, Bidner TD, Southern LL, et
fenbendazole against migrating, Ascaris stm larvae
in pigs. Am J Vet Res 45:984-986, 1984.

Stuart BP, Gosser 115, Allen CB, et alz Coccidiosis in
swine: Dose and age response to Isospora snis. Can
J Comp Med 46:317-320, 1982.

Whiteman CE, Glock RD: In Bickford AA and Swartz
KJ (eds): Stine Disease Manual. Pioneer
Impressions, Inc., Fort Collins, CO, 1995,

 

 

 

 

  

  
   

pages.
   
 

Section 9

PARASITES OF BIRDS

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts

 

 
 
 

Sporulated
Coccidia

Dispharynx sp.

 

Ascaridia sp.

50 um

 

      

Trichomonas

trophozoite : .
gallinae | Haemoproteus sp. Plasmodium sp.

Giardia sp.

Fig. 181. Common parasite eggs and oocysts found in bird feces.

153
Section 9

Location of Major Parasites

Skin

Menacanthus stramineus
Menopon gallinae
Goniocotes gallinae 7 .
Lipeurus caponis Parasites of Birds
Cuclotogaster heterographus
Echidnophaga gallinacea
Dermanyssus gallinae
Ornithonyssus sylviarum

 

 

eca

   
     

Argas persicus Heterakis gallinarum

Histomonas meleagridis
Eimeria spp

Syngamus trached

  
  
 
 

 

Prosthogonimus macrorchis

Small Intestine |

   

Esophagus & Crop

   

Davainea proglottina
Capillaria contorta Prog

 
  
   
   
 

Raillietina spp.

Trichomonas gallinae
Hymenolepis carioca

Ascaridia galli
y a Ei
Cheilospirura sp. imeria’ Sp.
Leucocytozoon spp.
Dispharynx nasuta
Haemoproteus spp.

Plasmodium spp. Cnemidocoptes mutans
Histomonas meleagridis

Fig. 182. Location of the major parasites found in birds.

Zoonotic Diseases

Table 43. Major zoonotic diseases associated with birds

 

Organism Disease Method of {nfection
Protozoa
Toxoplasma gondii Toxoplasmosis Ingestion of raw meat

Trematodes
Schistosomatids Cercarial dermatitis Contact with cercariae in water

Arthropods
Biting lice Transient pediculosis Contact with infected birds

154
 

Ne
a 8
Trichobilharzia me y |

A
\. Oy

Fig, 183. Trichobilbarzia spp. Adult flukes in ducks, cer-
cariae in water, cause swimmer’s itch in humans.

aK —— =

Coccidia in Birds

Parasites of Birds

  
    
  

   

    
  

CORO

OKA

Tap”

  

Toxoplasma gondii

ig. 184, Toxoplasma gondii.

Table 44. Major pathogenic species of coccidia affecting chickens, turkeys, clucks, and geese

 

 

 

Species Affected Average size (um) __Prepatent Period Region of Intestine
Chickens
Eimeria acervulina 18x 15 4 days Upper small intestine
Eimeria brunetti 25x19 5 days Lower small intestine, rectum
Eimeria maxima 30x21 5 days Middle and lower small intestine
Eimeria mivati 16 x 13 4 days Upper small intestine
Eimeria necatrix 20x 17 6-7 day Middle to entire small intestine
Eimeria tenella 22x 19 6-7 day Ceca
Turkeys
Eimeria adenoeides 26x17 4 days Ceea
Eimeria dispersa 26x21 5 days Entire small intestine
Eimeria gallopavonis 27x17 4 days Lower small intestine, rectum
Eimeria meleagridis 19x 16 4 days Midclle half of small intestine
Ducks
Eimeria aythyae 20 x 16 Unknown Small intestine
Eimeria burcephalae 20 x 16 Unknown Small intestine
Eimeria somateriae 32x 14 Unknown Kidney
Eimeria truncata 17x 21 5-6 days Kidne
Tyzzeria perniciosa 12x 10 6 days Entire small intestine
Geese
Eimeria anseris 22x 17 7 days Posterior small intestine
Eimeria kotlani 31x24 Unknown Cecum and rectum
Eimeria truncata 17x21 5-6 days Kidney

 

155
Section 9

 

 

 

 

 

Drugs

Table 45. Major anticoccidial drugs in chickens and turkeys

Drug Level in Feed (ppm) Drug Level in Feed (ppm)
Amprolium 125-250 Nitrofurazone 5S

Clopidol 125-250 Nitromide 250

Halofuginone 3 Sulfadimethoxine 125

Lasalocid 75-125 Sulfaquinoxyline 150-250

Monensin 60-100 Salinomyein 50-75
Nicarbazine 100-200 Zoalene 125

 

 

 

Table 46. Efficacy of anthelmintics for chickens

 

Efficacy against Parasites (%

 

 

Drug Dose (mg/kg PO) Ascaridia Capillaria__ Heterakis ‘odes
Cambendazole 10 mg, 95-100 = = —
30 95-100 _ — —
50 95-100 95-100 95-100 —
70 95-100 95-100 95-100 —
Coumaphos 40 ppmq 24hx 10d! 95-100 95-100 95-100 —
Fenbendazole 5 — — 95-100 —
15 _ 95-100 95-100 —
8q24hx3d 95-100 _ = —
6 q24hx3d 95-100 95-100 — —
30q24hx6d 95-100 95-100 — ~
Haloxon 50-100 — 80-100 — —
Ivermectin 0.1 — 95-100 — —
Levamisole 20 95-100 — _ _
40 95-100 95-100 — —
Mebendazole l0q24hx3d 95-100 i — —
20 q 24hx3 95-100 95-100 — —
60 q24hx3d 95-100 95-100 — —
Niclosamide 50 — i — 0-100
Phenothiazine 1,000 — _ 80-100 —
Piperazine 250 95-100 — — ~
5,000 ppm* 95-100 — — —
3,000 ppm 80-100 — — —
Pyrantel 15 95-100 — _ —
100 95-100 — 0-80 _
120 95-100 95-100 0-80 —

 

Dash indicates not affected or unknown efficacy.
“Administer in drinking water.
“Administer in feed.

156
Parasites of Birds

Table 47. Efficacy of anthelmintics for pheasants, turkeys, pigeons, and geese
Efficacy against Parasites (Y)

 

 

Drug Dose (mg/kg PO) Ascaridia _ Capillaria”Heterakis__ Amidostomum —_ Gestodes
Pheasants
Febantel 10 95-100 _ 95-100 —
Fenbendazole 60 ppm q 24h x6 a _ 95-100 95-100 —
Mebendazole 60 ppm g 24hx6 a 95-100 95-100 95-100 _
Niclosamide 50 or 125* _— — — 0-100
Turkeys
Levamisole 30 95-100 80-100 95-100 _
300 ppm x 1 db 95-100 0-100 95-100 _
Niclosamide 50 or _ _ ~ 0-100
125° _ _ — 0-100
Piperazine 4,000 ppm q 6 hr 95-100 _ aa _

4,000 ppmq 24hx2d 95-100 — a _

 

Pigeons
Fenbendazole 7.5 95-100 i - _
100 ppm q24hx 3d 95-100 95-100 _ _
Haloxon 50 — 95-100 — _
Levamisole 20-40 95-100 95-100 ~ _
Niclosamide 200 — — ~ 0-100
Geese
Disophenol 10 SC 95-100 —
Fenbendazole 5 95-100 —
60 ppmq 24h x6 d 95-100 —
Levamisole 15 95-100 —
Mebendazole 10q24hx 3d 95-100 —
60 ppm q 24hx 3. 95-100 —
Niclosamide 50 or = 0-100
125+ — 0-100
Pyrantel 50 95-100 —
Trichlorphon 75 95-100 _

 

Dash indicates not effective or unknown efficacy.
“Administer in food.
'Administer in drinking water.

157
Section 9

Internal Parasites

Ascaridia galli

Common name: Ascarid or roundworm (Ascaridoidea).
Size of adults: 12-18 cm.

Size of egy: 85 jum x 50 jm.

Importance: May decrease egg production, weight gain;

  

diarrhea, emaciation, anemia in heavy inf

 

tions.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. Adults found in small

 

intestine at necropsy.

    

Treatment: Fenbendazole, 10-50 mg/kg once, repeat in
10 days
Levamisole, 15 mg/kg PO5 for poultry, 40-50 mg/kg

  

Ascaridia galli PO
Qo Piperazine, 100-500 mg/kg and repeat in 3 weeks

Fig. 185a. Ascaridia galli. Prepatent period is 29-50 days.

 

Heterakis gallinarum

Common name: Cecal worm (Ascaridoidea).

Size of adults: 2-4 cm in cecum.

70 pum x 40 jm.

Importance: Transmits I listomonas meleagridis, the

Size of ¢:

 

protozoan agent of blackhead disease in turkeys.
Diagnosis:

 

ggs in fecal flotation. Adults found in ce-
cum at necropsy.
Treatment: Fenbendazole, 10-50 mg/kg repeat in 10 d
Levamisole, 40-50 mg/kg PO
Prevention for blackhead disease: Nitrofurazoladone,
Histomonas/Heterakis 7 ccl5,000 cc H20
Metronidazole, 25 mg/kg q 12 hx 5d

 

 

Benzimidazoles, before and during, exposure

Fig. 186a. Heterakis gallinarum. Prepatent period is 24-36 (See Hegnigi, et al., 1999.)
days.

Capillaria spp.

Common name: Several species (Trichuroidea).
Sil
Size of

 

e of adult: S-15 mm.
Approximately 50 jum x 25 pum, Several
S.

  
 

species have different

 

Importance: May cause emaciation, diarrhea, hemor-
thagic enteritis, and death.
Diagnosis:

 

‘gus in fecal flotation. Adults found in crop
lining and small intestine at necropsy.
Treatment: Fenbendazole, 10-50 mg/kg q 24h x Sd
Mebendazole, 25 mg/kg q 12 hx Sd
Ivermectin, 0.4 mg/kg PO or IM

 

Capillaria annulata
NW

1, LJ

Sine Qe

   

Fig, 187a. Capillaria cnnulata, Prepatent period is 1-2
months.

158
      
     
   
 

Parasites of Birds

Fig. 185c. Ascaridia galli.

& .
Aes oh MER as Is Bs

 

Fig, 186c. Histomonas meleagridis (the flagellated proto-
zoan in a liver section). See arrows. This protozoan para-
site is carried by Heterakis gallinarun.

 

Fig. 187c. Capillaria sp.

 
Section 9

 

Fig. 188a. Syngamus trachea. Prepatent period is 2 weeks.

 

Fig. 189a. Tapeworms (several kinds). Prepatent period is
2-3 weeks.

 

Fig, 190a. Eimeria spp. Prepatent period is 7-10 days.

160

Syngamus trachea

Common name: Gapeworm (Strongyloidea).
Size of adul
Size of egg: 90 4m x 50 jm.

2-5 cm in trachea.

   

Importance: Causes “gaping” (labored breathing), suffo-
cation, and death.

Diagnosis: Swabs of tracheal lesions, egg in fecal flota-
tion, Adults found in small intestine at necropsy.

Treatment: Fenhendazole, 30 mg/kg x 5 d

Raillietina spp., Choanotaenia spp., etc.

Common name: Tapeworm (Anoplocephalidae). Many
genera infect birds (Raillietina, Choanotaenia, etc.)
Size of adult: Varies depending on genera. Adult in small

intestine.

70-90 jum.
Vary from nonpathogenic to enteritis, ill-

Size of

 

Importance:
thrift, paralysis, and death.
Diagnosis: Proglottids or ova in Feces.
Treatment: Niclosamide, 50 mg/kg PO
Praziquantel, 6 mg/kg and repeat in 10-14 d.

Eimeria spp.

Common name: Coccidia (Apicomplexa).

Size of oocyst: See Table 44. Oocysts in small intestine.

 

Importance: Hemorrhagic diarrhea.
Diagnosis: Clinical signs and oocysts in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Amprolium, 0.012-0.024
x 35d
Sulfadimethoxine, 0.006%-0.05% q 24h x 6d
Sulfonamides (enteric), 55 mg/kg PO q 24 has needed

 

in water q. 24h
 

161

Parasites of Birds

Fig. 188c. Syngamus trachea.

    

Fig. 189c. Tapeworms. Note hooks in eggs (arrows).

an
Fig. 190c. Eimeria spp.

 

 
Trichomonas gallinae

 

Fig. 191a. Trichomonas gallinae. Fig. 191b. Trichomonas gallinae.

Trichomonas gallinae

Common name: Canker in pigeons, frounce in raptors (Mastigophora).
Size of trophozoite: 5-19 jm x 2-9 um.

Importance: Weight loss, oral and enteric mucosal lesions.

Diagnosis: Flagellated organisms in wet smears from mouth or crop. Lesions with cheesy exudate in mouth.

Treatment: Dimetridazole, 0.06-0.08% in water x 7 d or 50 mg/kg PO
Ipronidazole, 500 mg/gal water x 7 d
Carnidazole (Spartrix), 10 mg/adult bird, 5 mg/newly weaned bird
Metronidazole, 60 mg/kg PO

 

Leucocytozoon spp.

Fig, 192a. Lencocytozoon spp.

 

—_-- “gee

Fig. 192b. Lencocytozoon sp. (arrow).

Leucocytozoon spp.

Common name: None (Apicomplexa).

Size of organism: Gametocyte 14-15 jum x 5-6 jim in white blood cells, usually lymphocytes.
Importance: May cause decreased productivity and lethargy. Death in young birds.

Diagnosis: Blood smear. Gametes occur in blood within 7 days. Schizonts can be found in tissues.
Treatment: Clopidol, 0.0125-0.025% in feed for turkeys.

162
Parasites of Birds

=

, Biting Lice

=
=

  

Fig. 193b. Biting louse.

Fig, 193a. Biting lice.

External Parasites

Goniocotes spp., Menopon spp., Menacanthus spp., etc.

Common name: Biting lice (Insecta-Mallophaga). There are many species of biting lice in birds, sucking lice are not present.
Size of adult: 2-4 mm.
Importance: Irritant, may be debilitating.
Diagnosis: Examination of skin and feathers. For adults, nymph and eggs (nits).
Treatment: Carbaryl, roost sprays (5%)
Coumaphos, roost sprays
Malathion, feather and litter dust (poultry)
Pyrethrin, feather dust

   

Cnemidocoptes mutans

Fig. 194a. Cnemidocoptes mutans. Fig. 194b. Cnemidocoptes mutans.

Cnemidocoptes (Knemidocoptes) mutans

Common name: Leg and face mites (Arachnida-Sarcoptidae).
Size of adult: 400 jum.
Importance: Proliferative lesions of face, back, vent or legs, especially in old chickens and psitticines.
Diagnosis: Skin scrapings of affected areas for adults, nymphs, and eggs (nits).
Treatment: Benzyl benzoate, 10% topical solution once a week x 4 weeks.

Cratamiton, apply topically once a week x 4 weeks.

Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO or IM

163
Section 9

 

Dermanyssus gallinae

 

Rae
eo

Fig. 195a. Dermanyssus gallinae.

  
   

Fig. 195b. Dermanyssus gallinae.

Dermanyssus spp.

Common name: Feather mites (Arachnida-Dermanyssidae)
Size of adult: 1.0 mm.
Importance: Pruritus, decreased production, debilitation, anemia.
Diagnosis: Observation of mites (adults, nymphs, larvae, eggs) in feathers. Night observation is best. Life cycle is 9-12 days.
Treatment: Treat host and environment.
Coumaphos, (0.5%) dust topically x 3 d
Malathion, (4%) dust topically x 3d

 

F< nos
oS

 

Fig. 196a. Argas persicus. .
'& W0a. Argas persicir Fig. 196b. Argas persicus.

Argas persicus

Common name: Ticks (Arachnida-Argasidae).

Size of adult: 7 x 5 mm.

Importance: Decreased production, anxiety, anemia, vector for fowl spirochaetosis.

Diagnosis: Soft ticks on birds at night or in environment. Birds afraid to go in chicken house. Life cycle is 1 month.
spray, or malathion 1-3% spray,

 

Treatment: Treat host and environment. Premises at 1-2 gal/1,000 ft? with carbaryl

or sprays containing pyrethroids or coumaphos.

164
Parasites of Birds

ig. 197. Protalges (Fainalges) sp. (feather mite, 360 4m x Fig. 198. Histological section of bird intestir
225 jum) from a parakeet. cidiosis (schizonts at arrows).

Fig. 199. Dispharynx sp. larvated eggs (40 ym x 20 4m ).
Adult nematodes in gizzard or proventriculus.

     
 

Fig. 200a. Giardia sp. cysts in sugar fecal flotation (15
tum). Giardia sp. is found in many birds.

 

   

0b. Haemoproteus sp. in erythrocytes (Protozoa-

lesa) arrows). Fig. 200c. Sarcocystis sp. (pseudocyst) in muscle

(Protozoa-Apicomplexa).

 

165
Section 9

Bibliography

Textbooks

Davis JW, Anderson RC (eds): Parasitic Diseases of Wild
Animals. Ames, lowa, lowa State University Press,
1971.

Davis JW, Anderson RC, Karstad LH, Trainer DO (eds):
Infectious and Parasitic Diseases of Wild Birds. Ames,
lowa, lowa State University Press, 1971.

Dunn, AME Veterinary Hebninthology. London, William
Heinemann Medical Books Ltd., 1978.

Flynn RS: Parasites of Laboratory Animals. Ames, lowa,
lowa State University Press, 1973.

Fowler ME (ed): Zoo & Wild Animal Medicine. 2nd edi-
tion. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1986.

Gaafer $M, Howard WE, Marsh RE (eds): Parasites,
Pests, and Predators. New York, Elsevier, 1985.

Gordon RE, Jordan FTW (eds): Poultry Diseases. London,
Bailliere ‘lindall, 1982.

Kranz GW: A Manual of Acarology. 2nd edition.

allis, Oregon State University Book Stores, 1962.

Lapage E (ed): Monmig’s Veterinary Helmintbology and
Entomology. Sth edition. Baltimore, William &
Wilkins, 1962.

Levine ND: Protozoan Parasites of Domestic Animals and
of Man. nd edition. Minneapolis, Burgess Publishing
Co., 1973.

Olsen OW! Animal Parasites: Their Biology and Life

 

  

 

  

cles. Ind edition. Minneapolis, Burgess Publishing

Co., 1967.

Petrack ML (ed): Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds,
Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1982.

Richie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR: Avian Medicine:
Principles and Application. Lake Worth, Florida,
Wingers Publishing Inc., 1994.

Soulsby EJL: Helminths, Arthropods and Protozoa of
Domesticated Animals (Monnig). Philadelphia, Lea &
Febiger, 1968.

Wallach JD, Boever WJ: Diseases of Exotic Animals.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co, 1983.

Wobeser GA: Diseases of Wild Waterfowl. New York,
Plenum Press, 198 1.

   

 

166

Miscellaneous

Bennett GE, and Fallis AM: Blood parasites of birds in
Algonquin Park, Canada, and a discussion of their
transmission. Canad. J. Zool. 38:321-273, 1960.

Bennett GE, Garnham PCC, and Fallis AM: On the status
of the genera Lewcocytozoon Ziemann, 1898 and
Haemoprotens Kruse, 1890 (Haemosporidiida:
Leucocytozoidae and Hlaemoproteidae). Canad | Zool
43:927-932, 1965.

Current WI, Upton $J, and Haynes 1B: The life cycle of
Cryptosporiditn baileyi n. sp. (Apicomplexa,
Cryptosporidiidae) infecting chickens. J Protozool
33:289-296, 1986.

Fain A, and Hyland KE
birds. The variability of Sternostoma tracheacoliun
Lawrence, 1948, in domestic and wild birds.
Parasitology 52:401-424, 1962.

Hegngi FN, Doerr J, Cummings 1’, et al The
ness of benzimidazole derivatives for the treatment and
prevention of histomonosis (blackhead) in turkeys. Ver
Parasitol $1:29-37, 1999.

Keymer IF: The diagnosis and treatment of common
psittacine diseases. Mod Ver Pract 39:22-30, 1958

Leibovitz L: Unusual bird-parasite

 

 

The mites parasitic in the lungs of

 

    

ctive-

 

 

 

‘ases and overall para-
site incidence found in a diagnostic laboratory during a
five-year period. Avian Dis 6: 141-144, 1962.

Manson-Bahr P: The life history of avian filaria parasites.
Bull Br Orn Club 74:75-77, 1954.

McDonald ME: Annotated Bibliography of Hebninths of
Waterfowl (Anatidae). U.S. Department of the Interior.
Special Scientific Repon—Wildlife No. 125, 1969.

McDonald ME: Catalogue of Helminths of Waterfowl.
US. Department of the Interior. Special Scientific
Report No. 126, 1969b.

McDonald ME: Key to Trematodes Reported in
Waterfowl. U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and
Wildlife Service, Resource Publication No. 142,
Washington, DC, 1981.

Peirce MA, and Bevan BJ: Blood parasites of imported
psittacine birds. Vet Rec 100:282-284, 1977.

Radford CD: The mites (Acarina: Analgesidae) living on
or in the feathers of birds. Parasitology 42:199-230,
1953.

Scholtens RG, New JC, Johnson S: The nature and treat-
ment of giardiasis in parakeets. | Am Vet Med Assi
180:170-173, 1982.

 

 

 

 
Section 10
PARASITES OF RATITES
(Ostriches, Emus, and Cassowaries)

Location of Major Parasites

   
   
        
        
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
  
   

Philophthalmus

Baylisascaris larvae

Chandlerella larvae
Struthiolipeurus
Prorolichidae Toxoplasma pseudocysts

Ctenocephalides
Lungs

Simulium
several ticks
Paronchocerca

Syngamus

Intestine

Cryptosporidium
Giardia
Eimeria
Codiostomum
Ascaridia
Deletrocephalus

 
 

Houttuynia
Davainea

Histomonas

 

Proverticulis/

 

 

 

Gizzard
Connective tissue Libyostrongylus
Dicheilonema Cymea
Habronema

Fig. 201, Locations of parasites in ratites (ostrich, emu, rhea and cassowary).

Drugs
Table 48. Anthelmintics for ratites
Internal parasites

Fenbendazole, 15 mg/kg PO or in feed (nematodes and cestodes)
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or PO (nematodes)

External parasites

Carbaryl (5%) dust is used for most external parasites (ticks, mites, lice, fleas)
Wermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or PO (ticks, mites, lice)

167
Section 10

Common Parasites

Table 49. Parasites of ratites

 

Parasite
Protozoa
Cryptosporidium
Toxoplasma gondii
Histomonas meleagridis
Giardia
‘Trichomonas
Leucocytozoon struthionis
Plasmodium struthionis
Eimeria spp.
Isospora spp.

Trematodes
Philopbtbalinus gralli

Cestodes
Houttuynia struthionis
Davainea spp.

Nematodes
Libyostrongylus spp. (wireworms)
Codiostomum struthionis

 

Syngamus trachea

Dicheilonema spp. (filarial worm in connective tissue)
Chandlerella quiscali (larval stage in CNS)
Baylisascaris sp. (larval stage in CNS)
Paronchocerca struthiononus
Struthiofilaria megalocephala

Cymea colini

Ascaridia orthocerca

Deletrocephalus spp.

Habronema (Spiroptera) incerta
Dromaestrongylus bicuspis (small intestine)

External parasites
Lice
Struthiolipeurus spp. (biting lice)
Mites
Pterolichidae spp. (quill mites)
Gabucinia spp.
Paralges pachynemis
Ticks
‘Ticks from a variety of mammalian, avian,
and reptile hosts have been reported to infest ratites.
These include:
Amblyomma spp.

 

Argas persicus

Haemopbysalis spp.

Otobius megnini

Rhipicephalus spp.
Fleas

Clenocephalides felis
Flies

Simulinm spp.

168

Ratite

Ostrich, and likely to be found in all ratites
All ratites

Ostrich, rhea

Ostrich, emu

Ostrich, emu

Ostrich

Ostrich

Emu, and likely to be found in all ratites
Ostrich

Ostrich

Ostrich
Emu, cassowary, rhea

Ostrich
Ostrich
Ostrich, emu, rhea
Ostrich, rhea
Emu
Ostrich, emu
Ostrich
Ostrich
Ostrich

Rhea

Rhea

Rhea

Emu

Ostrich, rhea
Ostrich

Ostrich, rhea
Ostrich, rhea

Ostrich

Ostrich
Parasites of Ratites (Ostriches, Emus, and Cassowaries)

     

Fig. 205. Pseudocyst of Toxoplasma gor

Fig. 204. Ascaridia sp. egg from a rhea (85 yum x 50 4m ). of a thea (psuedocyst 25 wan }

169

 
w

Section 10

Bibliography

Bartlett CM, Anderson RC: Paronchocerca struthionus

  

irom ostriches (Struthio camelus) with a redescription
of Paronchocerea ciconiarum (Peters, 1936) and a re-
view of the genus. Can J of Zoo 64:2480-249 1, 1986.

Borst GHA, Lambers GM: Typhlohepatitis in ostriches
(Struthio camelus) caused by Histomonas infection. Tij
voor Dierg 1103536, 1985.

Bowthorpe G, Voss G: Breeding the rhea (Rbea americana)

 

 

   

and emu (Dromiceius novachollandiae) at Winnipeg,
Zoo. Int Zoo Year 8:147-150, 1968.

Farr MME: Further observations on survival of the proto-
zoan parasite [istomonas maleagridis, and eggs of
poultry nematodes in feces on infected birds. Cornell
Vet 51:3-13, 1961.

Fockema A, etal Anthelmintic efficacy of fenbendazole
against Libyostrongylus douglassi and Houtt
struthionis in ostriches. | of S African Vet Assoc
56:47-48, 1985.

Gajadhar AA: Cryptosporidium species in imported os-
triches and consideration of possible implications for

    

nia

 

 

170

birds in Canada. Can Vet J 334:115-116, 1993.

Greve JH, Harrison G
flukes in captive
177:909-910, 1980.

Grow A: Exotic ticks on imported ostriches, Foreign Anim
Dis Rep, 17:5-7,1989.

Gruss B, et al.: The anthelmintic efficacy of resorantel
against Houttuynia struthionis in ostriches. Jofs
African Vet Assoc 59:207-208, 1988.

Hoover JP, et ale: Quill mites in an ostrich with rhinitis, si-
nusitis, and air sacculitis. Com Anim Pract 2: 26,
1988.

Jensen JM, Johnson JH, Weiner ST: Husbandry and med-
ical management of ostriches, emus and rbeas. College
Station, Texas, Wildlife and Exotic Animal
Teleconsultants, 1992.

Malan FS, et al: Resistance of Libyostrongylus donglassi

 

Jonjunctivitis caused by eye
1 ostriches. JAVMA

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

in ostriches to levamizole. J of § African Vet Assoc
59:202-203, 1988.
Mertins JW, Sehlater JL.

 

otic ectoparasites of ostriches
recently imported into the United States. J of Wild! Dis
27:180-182, 1991.

Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR: Avian Medicine.
Lake Worth, Florida, Wingers Publishing, Inc., 1994.
Soulsby EJL, Monnig HO: Helmint
protozoa of domesticated anima

Bailliere Tindall, 1982.

 

 

  

arthropods and

   

s. 7th edition. London,
 

Section 11

PARASITES OF LABORATORY ANIMALS

Drugs

Table 50. Coccidiostats used in rabbits

Drug, Dosage
Monensin 0.002-0.004% in feed
Sulfaquinoxaline
Sulfamethazine

75-100 mg/kg

62.5 ppm in feed

Sulfadimethoxine
Decoquinate

Lasalocid 120 ppm in Feed

Table 51. Dewormers for use in hedgehogs

0.04% in water; 125-250 ppm in Feed
8 gigal water; 0.5-1.0% in feed

 

Parasite Drug
Nematodes Ivermectin

Fenbendazole
Mebendazole

Praziquantel

Cestodes

Metronidazole

 

Pyrethrins/carbamates
Mites Amitraz

Ivermectin

Dose/Route
0.2 mg/kg, PO; SQ once; repeat q 2 weeks
10.
15 mg/kg PO once; repeat q 2 weeks

7 mgfkg PO; SQ once; repeat q 2 weeks
25 mg/kg PO BID

lopically

 

5 mg/kg PO once; repeat q 2 weeks

0.3% topically weekly for 2-3 weeks
0.2 mg/kg PO; SQ

 

Common Parasites

Table 52. Eimeria species (protozoa) infecting rabbits

 

 

Species Mean Size of Oocyst (\tm) Prepatent Period (days) Pathogenicity
E. stiedae 37 x 20 15-18 Variable

E. irresidua 38 x 26 7-8 Diarrhea

E, magna 35x24 6-7 Diarrhea

E, media 31x18 6-7 Moderate

E, perforans 2x15 5 Nonpathogenic
E, exigua 15x13 Unknown Unknown

E, intestinalis 27x18 10 Diarrhea

E, matsubayashii 25x18 7 Slight

E. neoleporis 39 x 20 12 Diarrhea

5. coecicola 29x 18 9-10 Unknown

E. flavescens 32x21 9 Diarrhea

 

 

 

RAR
ses

Section 11

Table 53. Common parasites in laboratory animals

Parasite
Rabbits
Nematodes.

Tapeworms

Trematodes

Mires.

Hamsters
Protozoa

Nematodes

 

Mites

Gerbils.
Protozoa

Nematodes.

 

 

G

 

enus and Spe

Passalurus ambiguous (pinworm)
Obeliscoides cuniculi

Cittotaenia variabilis, C. ctenoides
Mosgovoyia spp.

Monoecocestus americana

Hasstilesia tricolor
Fas

  

iola hepatica
Cheyletiella spp.

Psoroptes cuniculi
Listrophorns spp.

Spiromuclens (Hexamita) muris
Giardia sp.

‘Tritrichomonas spp.

Balantidium sp.

Cryptosporidium

 

Syphacia sp. (pinworms)

Hymenolepis nana (direct life cycle)

H
insects as intermediate hosts).

 

diminuta (indirect life cycle using,

Larval tapeworms

Demodex spp.
Notoedres sp.
Ornithonyssus bacoti
Lipony

 

sus bacoti

 

iardia sp.

Dentostomella translucida (pinworms)

Syphacia spp. (pinworms)

172

Comments.
Pinworm (Fig. 209)
Found in the stomach

Larval tapeworms (cysticerei) may be in the liver,
fre

 

in the peritoneal cavity, and attached to the

omentum

Nonpathogenic
Rare

Fur mite, walking dander; common (Fig. 211)

 

Causes mange in the ears; common (Fig. 210)
Fur mite; not common (Figs. 212, 213)

A flagellated protozoan that may cause enteritis
A common flagellated protozoan. Cysts and

 

trophozoites found in the small intestine and fe

Hlagellated protozoan, usually nonpathogenic;
15 x 10 um Encepbalitozoon, Pneumocystis,
Entomoeba, Chilomastix, etc.; uncommon

A ciliated protozoan, usually nonpathogenic;
uncommon

May cause diarrhea. Qocysts detected in feces

Eggs approximately 115 x 40 jum Other nematodes
are rare in hamsters in North America

Eggs of H. nana are 50 x 40 um

Eggs of H. diminnta are 50 x 65 um
Cysticerci of Taenia taeniaeformis may be in the liver

May cause alopecia and dry, scaly skin; very common
May cause skin lesions

Blood-sucking mites from birds and rodents (Fig. 207)

 

Blood-sucking mites from birds and rodents.

May cause diarrhea, Cysts and trophozoites can be
detected in fe

 

s

IF in contact with mi

 

e or rats (ig. 221)

 
Parasites of Laboratory Animals

Table 53. Commom parasites in laboratory animals (continued)

 

 

Parasite nus and Species Comments

 

   

Mites
Demodex spp. May cause skin lesions
Liponyssoides sp. Blood-sucking mites from birds and rodents

Cestodes.
Hymenolepis spp. May cause debilitation

Mice

Protozoa
Trypanosoma museuli Flagellates in the blood
Toxoplasma gondii Cysts in the tissues
Sarcocystis nutris Sarcocysts in the muscles.
Klossiella muris Coccidia in the kidneys
Encepbalitozoan cuniculi Microsporidia in the brain
Pneumocystis cerinii Trophozoites and cysts in lungs and other tissues
Giardia mauris Trophozoites and cysts in small intestine and feces
Spironucleus (Hexamita) nutris Flagellated protozoa in small intestine and feces
Tritrichomonas muris Nonpathogenic flagellate in the gastrointestinal tract
Eimeria falciformis Pathogenic coccidian. Oocysts are detected in the feces a
Cryptosporidinm muris: C. parvum May cause diarrhea, especially in young animals.

Oocysts are 7x 5 um (C, mur

 

and ae
5x 3 um (C. parewn)
Entomoeba munis Nonpathogenic organism @

Syphacia obvelata (pinworm) Adults are 1.1-3.4 mm in the large intestine

 

Nematodes

High number of worms may be pathogenic
Fggs are 134 x 36 wm

Aspicularis tetraptera (pinworm) Adults are 2.0-4.7 mm in the large intestine
High number of worms may be pathogenic
Eggs are 90 «41 um

 

 

Cestodes
Hymenolepis diminuta Adults 20-60 mm long x 4 mm wide. This tapeworm
hay no hooks on the scoles; requires an
intermediate insect host
Hymenolepis nana Adults 25-40 mm long x F mm wide. Ir has hooks
on the soles (armed rostellum); docs not require
an intermediate host
Hymenolepis microstoma Found in the bile duct
Taenia taeniaeformis Intermediate eysticercus stage in the liver of mice
Fleas
Xenopsylla cheopis (orieneal rat flea) Transmits plague
Nosopsyllus fasciatus (northern rat flea)
Leptosylla segnis (mouse flea)
Lice
Polyplax serrata (mouse louse) Sucking louse (Hig. 214)
Hoplopleura spp. Sucking louse
Mites

 

Ornithonyssus bacoti (tropical rat mite) Any of these mites can be found on mice. Mites often
Orithonyssus sylviarum (northern fowl Cause skin conditions and irritation (Fig. 207)

mite)

173
ses

Section 11

Table 53. Commom parasites in laboratory animals (continued)

Parasite

Rats
Protozoa

Nematodes

todes

 

Lice

 

Genus and Specie

Liponyssoides sanguincous (house
mouse mite)

Haemogamasus pontiger

Eulaelaps stabularis

Laclaps echidrs (spiny rat mite)

Haemolaclaps spp.

Myobia musculi (fur mite)

Radfordia affinis (fur mite)

Psorergates simplex (hair follicle mite)
(Fig. 216)

Notoedres musculi

 

Demodex museuli
M)

  

ocoptes musculinns (Fig. 215)

‘Trypanosoma letwisi
Toxoplasma gondii

Sareoeystis muris

 

Encepbalitozoan (Nosema) cuniculi

Pneumocystis carinii

Giardia muris
Spironuclens (Hexamita) muris

Eimeria nieschultzi
Entomoeba muris

Syphacia muris (pinworm)

Aspicularis tetraptera (pinworm)

Heterakis spumosa

Hymenolepis nana

Hymenolepis diminiuta

 

Polyplax spinulosa

174

Comments

In blood (nonpathogenic)

Cysts in various tissues

Cysts in muscles

Microsporidian, often nonpathogenic

Trophozoites, cysts, precysts, and intracystic

 

bodies in lungs

Cysts and trophozoites in feces. Low pathogenicity

 

 

Flagellated protozoan (8 x 3 yum) causes duodeniti

 

There are many nonpathogenic flagellates in rats
Oocysts are 22 x 17 um. It causes diarrhea, weakness,
emaciation, and death in young rats
Found in the cecum and colon (nonpathogenic)

In the cecum and colon. Causes reduced growth.
Males are 1-1.5 mm long; females are 3-6 mm
Eggs are 140 x 45 pum
Bigger worms than Syphacia muris. Males are
2-4 mm; females are 3-4 mm. Eggs are $0 x 40 jum
Found in the cecum and colon of wild rats. Has a

long.

  

typical ascarid-like egg (60 x 50 pm). Nonpathogenic

Found in the small intestine. Called the dwart

 

tapeworm because it is usually 20-40 mm long, by

nt on the rostellum.

 

1 mm wide. Hooks are pre

Life cycle is direct or indirect (using insects as

  

intermediate hosts) Can infect humans

Found in the small intestine, Called the rat tapeworm.
It is much larger than H. nana (20-60 mm long x
4 mm wide). There are no hooks on the rostellum

 

The spined rat louse is common in laboratory and

wild rats. Sucks blood and causes irritation, anemia,

 

and debilitation
Table 53. Commom parasites in laboratory animals (continued)
Parasite Genus and Species
Mites

Radfordia ensifera (also Myobia ratti)

Notoedres muris

Laelaps echidninus

Guinea Pigs
Protozoa
Cryptosporidiun wrairi
Giardia caviae

Eimeria caviae

Toxoplasma gondii
Sarcocystis caviae

Nematodes

Praspidodera uncinata

Lice
Glivicola lindolpbi, G. procelli
Gyropus ovalis
Trimenopon hispidium
Fleas
Nosophyllus fasciatus
Pulex irritans
Ctenocephalides felis
Rhopalopsylla clavicola
Mites
Demodex caviae
Chirodiscoides caviae (Fig.

 

Myocoptes musculinus
Notoedres muris

Trixacarus caviae (Vii

 

219)

 

Hedgchogs

 

sematodes,

Capillaria aerophila

175

Parasites of Laboratory Animals

Comments

Fur mite of rats. Commonly occurs on wild rats.
May cause irritation and ill health

 

r mange mite resembles Sarcoptes scabiei, and are
burrowing mites that cause mange. Scabby lesions

 

are primarily on the head, face
The spin

. nose, ears, and tail
rat mite uncommon on laboratory rats.

 

Lives in bedding and feeds on rats at night. Long,
red mites, approximately | mm long, with long

legs. Usually nonpathogenic, but ean transmit

 

Heptozoon muris

May cause diarrhea and death
Flagellated protozoans. Trophozoites 12x 5 yum.
Trophozoites and cysts can be Found in Fe

 

cs.
Nonpathologic

Ooeysts are 19x 16 fum. These coceidia may cause

diarrhea and weight loss. Sulfas may be helpful in

controlling this infection

Cysts in various tissues

Cysts in various muscles

 

Numerous nonpathogenic flagellated protozoa found
in the gastrointestinal tract

Found occasionally in the cecum. Unlikely to cause
disease. Guinea pigs also experimental hosts for
Trichinella spiralis, Dictyocaulus viviparus,

D. filaria, Metastrongylus apri,
Parelapbostrongylus tennis, and ascarids

Fairly common, but not very pathogenic (Hig. 218)

Uncommon unless there isa flea problem in the
houschold

Found in the lungs

eae
Section 11

Table $3, Commom parasites in laboratory animals (continued)

 

Parasite Genus and Species
Crenosoma sp.
Capillaria hepatica

Fleas
Archaeopsylla erinacei
Mites
Caparini sp.
Chorioptes sp.
Otodectes cynotis
Ornithonyssus sp.
Ticks

Ixodes hexagonus
Amblyomma nuttalli

 

  

Fig. 208 Hepatic coccidiosis (Eimeria steidae) in rabbits.

Comments
Found in the lungs
Found in the liver (necrotic areas filled with eges)

May cause severe skin irritation; may bite humans in

the household

 

Fig. 207 Ornithonyssus sp. (mite) on a hedgehog.
These mites suck blood and cause irritation.

 

Fig. 209 Passalurus ambiguous (pin-
worm) in rabbits, Adult with bulbous
esophagus (arrow). Inset is egg

100 jum x 43 pm.

176
rasites of Laboratory Animals

Fig. 211 Cheyletiella spp. (fur mite) in rabbits. Ne
prominent palpal hooks (arrow). :

 

view).

‘rata, the mouse louse.

 
Section 11

 

Fig. 216 Psorergates simplex hair follicle mite in section of
skin of mouse (arrows).

 

Fig. 218 Gliricola, the common biting louse of
guinea pigs.

 

Fig. 220 Cryptosporidium sp. (hamster).

178

 

Fig. 217 Trypanosoma sp. in blood of mice and rats.

 

DD 8 of ws

Fig. 221 Pinworm eggs (Dentostomella spp.) in a gerbil.
    
 

Fig. 224 Chirodiscoides caviae (a mite),

found on guinea pigs.

Bibliography

Brockie RE: The hedgehog mange mite, Caparinia tripilis in
New Zealand. N Z Vet J 22:243-247, 1974.

Duwel D, Brech K: Control of oxyuriasis in rabbits by fen-
bendazole. Lab Anim 15:101-105, 1981.

Fitzgerald PR: Efficacy of monensin or amprolium in the
prevention of hepatic coccidiosis in rabbits. J Protozool
19:332-334, 1972.

Flecknell P (ed): Manual of Rabbit Medicine and Surgery.
Ames, lowa, lowa State University Press, 160 pp., 2000.

Flynn RJ: Parasites of Laboratory Animals. Ames, lowa,
lowa State University Press, 1973.

Graczyk TK, Cranfield MR, Dunning C, et al Fatal cryp-
tosporidiosis in a juvenile captive African hedgehog
(Atelerix albiventris). J Parasitol $4:178-180, 1998.

Harkness JE, Wagner JE: The Biology and Medicine of
Rabbits and Rodents, 4th edition. Baltimore, Williams &
Wilkins, 1995.

179

Parasites of Laboratory Animals

the ears.

Fig. 223 Otodectes cynotis in
of a ferret.

 

 

Fig. 225 Chirodiscoides caviae (enlarged view).

Hsu CK: Parasitic Diseases. In HL Foster et al. (eds): The
Mouse in Biomedical Research. II. Diseases. New York,
Academic Press, 1982, pp. 359-372.

Kummel BA, Estes SA, Arlan LG: Trixacarus caviae infesta-
tion of guinea pigs. | Ant Vet Med Assoc 177:903-908,
1980.

Letcher JD: Amitraz as a treatment for acariasis in African
hedgehogs (Atelerix albiventris). | Zoo Anim Med
19:24-29, 1988.

Lloyd M (ed.}: Ferrets: Health, Husbandry and Diseases.
Ames, lowa, lowa State University Press, 1999, 208 pp.

Malley D: Use of a frontline spray in rabbits. Ver Rec
140:664, 1997.

Oge H, Avaz E, Ide T, Dalgic $: The effect of doramectin,
moxidectin and netobimin against natural infections
Syphacia muris in rats. Vet Parasitol 88:299-303, 2000.

Okerman L: Diseases of Domestic Rabbits. 2nd edition.

State University Press, 1994, 160 pp.

       

 

 

 

Ames, Iowa, low:

PAR
ses

Section 11

Percy DH, Barthold SW: Pathology of Laboratory Rodents
and Rabbits. Ames, lowa, lowa State University Press,
1993.

Richardson V: Rabbits: Health, Husbandry and Diseases.
Ames, lowa, lowa State University: Press, 1999, 184 pp.

Richardson VCG: Diseases of Domestic Guinea Pigs. 2nd
edition. Ames, lowa, lowa State University Press, 2000,

 

 

152 pp.
Richardson VCG: Diseases of Small Domestic Rodents.
State University Press, 1997, 240 pp.

 

Ames, lowa, lowa

180

Smith Aj: Husbandry and medicine of African hedgehogs
(Atelerix albiventris). J Small Exotic Anim Med 2:21-28,
199,

Staley EC, Staley EE, Behr MJ: Use of permethrin as a miti-

cide in the African hedgehog (Atelerix albiventris). Ver

138, 1994.

¢ eradication of pinworms (Syphacia

 

 

Hum Toxicol 3

Zenner 1: Effect
mutris, Syphacia obvelata and Aspiculuris tetraptera)
from a rodent breeding colony by oral anthelmintic ther-
apy. Lab Anim 32:337-342, 1998.

  
 
Section 12

PARASITES OF WILDLIFE

Important Parasites of Wildlife

Table 54. Important parasites of selected wildlife species

 

 

    

 

  

Host Genus and Species Location Common Name

Bears Baylisuscaris trans/uga Intestine ‘Ascarid
Sarcoptes sp. Skin Mange mite

hinella spiralis Muscles Trichina worm

Ursicoptes americanus Skin Mange mite

Beaver Giardia sp. Intestine Beaver fever
Platypsyllus and Prolabidocarpus Skin Beaver beetles
Schizocarpus mingandi Skin Mites
Stichorehis sp. Cecum Cecal fluke

Bighorn sheep

Bison

Caribou/ Reindeer

Coyote/Fox

Ducks

Otobius megnini
Protostrongylus spp.
P.

Skrjabinema ovis

 

soroptes ovis

Dictyocaulus viviparus
Fasciola hepatica
Fascioloides magna

 

Haemonel as contortis
Oesophagostomum radiatum
Ostertagia ostertagi

Besnoitia sp.
Cephenemyia trompe
Cysticercus of Taenia krabbei
Dictyocaulus hadweni
Oedemagena tarandi
Parelaphostrongylus tenuis

Dracunculus insignis
Echinococers multilocularis
Filaroides (Oslerus) osleri
Otodectes cynotis
Physaloptera spp.

 

Amidostonuim spp.
Lencocytozoon simondi
Sarcocystis rileyi

Several tapeworms, trematodes,

acanthocephala (sce McDonald, 1969,

1969b, 1981 in bird Bibliography.)

181

In car canal
Lung,
Skin

Large intestine

Lungs
Liver

Liver
Abomasum
Large imestine
Abomasum

Skin
Nasal sinus
Muscle
Lungs
Under skin

Spinal cord

Under the skin
Intestine
Trachea

Ears

Stomach

Skin

Gizzard lining
Blood
Muscles
Intestine

Spinous ear tick
Lungworms
Scabies
Pinworm

Lungworm
Liver fluke

Deer liver fluke

Large stomach worm
Nodular worm
Brown stomach worm

Protozoan cyst
Bor fly larva
Measles
Lungworm
Botshvarbles
Meningeal worm

Subcutaneous worm
Alveolar hydatid tapeworm
‘Tracheal worm

Ear mite

Stomach worm

Mange mite

Gizzard worms
Leucocytozoonosis
Rice belly

Several
Section 12

Table $4, Important parasites of selected wildlife species (continued)

Host
Elk

Fish

Mink

Moose

Mountain goat

Mule deer

Muskrat

Opossum

Genus and Species
Dictyocaulus spp.
Elaeopbora sclneideri
Fascioloides magna
Parelapbostrongylus tenuis
Psoroptes sp.

Anasakis spp. (larvae)

Dipbyllobothriun latum
Diplostomum spp. (metacercaria)
Nanophyetus salmincola (metacercaria)
Phocanema spp. (larvae)

Alaria spp.
Enparyphiuni spp.
Nanoph
Paragonimus kellicotti

yetus salmincola

  

Dioctopbyma renale
Filaroides martis
Physaloptera spp.
Skrjabingylus nasicola

Dermacentor albipictus
Fascioloides magna
Parelapbostrongylus tenuis
Taenia krabbei (cysticercus)
Parelapbostrongylus odocoilei
lus

Skrjabinema ovis

 

Protostrong

 

spp.

 

Cepbenemyia spp.
Elaeophora scbneideri
Fascioloides magna
Lipoptena spp.

Onchocerea cervipedis
Parelaphostrongylus odocoilei
Cysticercus of Taentia krabbei

Capillaria hepatica

Cysticercus of Taenia taeniaformis
Giardia sp.

Mites (numerous kinds)
‘Trematodes (numerous kinds)
Trichuris opaca

Brachylaima virginiamun
Capillaria spp.

Cruzia americana
Physaloptera turgida
‘Trypanosoma eruzi

182

Location
Lungs

Arteries

Liver

Spinal cord/brain
Skin

Muscle

Pleurocercoid in muscle

 

ve
Kidney, eye, heart, etc.
Flesh

Intestine
Intestine
Intestine
Lungs
Kidney
Lungs
Stomach
Nasal sinus

Skin
Liver

Spinal cord
Muscle

Muscle
Lungs
Intestine

Retropharyngeal pouches
Arteries

Liver

Skin

Under skin

Muscle

Muscle

Liver
Liver
Intestine
Hair
Intestine
Intestine

Intestine
Lungs, intestine
Intestine
Stomach

Blood

Common Name
Lungworm
Bloodworm
Deer liver fluke
Meningeal worm
Mange mite

Cod worm

Broadfish tapeworm

 

ye fluke
Salmon poisoning fluke
Cod worm

Fluke

Fluke

Fluke

Lung fluke
Kidney worm
Lungworm
Stomach worm
Nasal worm

Moose or winter tick
Liver fluke
Meningeal worm
Measles

Muscle worm
Lungworm
Pinworm

Throat bors
Arterial worm
Large liver fluke
Keds

Skin worm
Muscle worm
Measels.

None (cggs in liver)
Liver cysts

Beaver Fever

Mites

Flukes

Whipworm

Fluke
Capillary worm
Pinworm

Stomach worm
Blood flagellate
Table 54. Important parasites of selected wildlife species (continued)

Parasites of Wildlife

 

 

    

Host Genus and Species Location Common Name
Porcupine Dipetalonema sp. Under skin Skin worm
Monvecocestus sp. Small intestine Tapeworm
Sarcoptes sp. Skin Mange mite
Trichodectes setosus Mair Louse
Wellco:nia evaginata Large intestine Pinworm
Rabbits Cittotaenia spp. Intestine Tapeworm
Cysticercus of Taenia pisiformis Peritoneal cavity Larval tapeworm
Dirofilaria scapiceps Under skin Skin worm
Graphidivun strigosum Stomach Stomach worm
Obeliscoides cunniculi Stomach Stomach worm
Passalurns ambiguous Large intestine Pinworm
Protostrongylus spp. Lungs Lungworm
Raccoon Baylisascaris procyonis Small intestine Ascarid
Crenosoma goblei Lungs Lungworm
Gnathostoma procyonis Stomach Stomach worm
Dracunculus insignis Under the skin Subcutaneous worm
Physaloptera spp. Stomach Stomach worm
Reptiles Ascarids (many kinds) Intestines Ascarid
Kalicephalus spp. Intestines Hookworm
Ophionyssus sp. Skin Mite
Pinworms are very common Intestines Pinworms
Strongyloides sp. Intestine Threadworm
Rodents Capillaria hepatica Liver (eggs) None

Striped skunk

White-tailed deer

Wild cats

Baylisascaris columnaris
Capillaria hepatica
Physaloptera spp.
Skrabingylus spp.

Cephenemyia spp.
Fascioloides magna
Haemonchus contortus

Linognathus spp. and Solenopotes spp.

Lipoptena spp.
Tricholipleurus spp.
Parelaphostrongylus andersoni
Parelaphostrongylus tenuis

Cylicospirura spp.
Physaloptera spp.
Toxoplasma gondii

Small intestine
Liver (eggs)
Stomach
Nasal sinus

Throat
Liver
Abomasum
Skin

Skin

Skin
Muscle
Meninges

Stomach
Stomach
Intestine/feces

Ascarid

None

Stomach worm
Sinus worm

Throat bot
Large liver fluke
Barber-pole worm
Sucking lice

Keds (wingless flies)
Biting lice

Muscle worm
Meningeal worm

Stomach nodular worm
Stomach worm
Toxo

 

Note: Many of the parasites of wild animals are the same as or similar to parasites in related domesticated animals.

183
Section 12

Parasites

Parelaphostrongylus tenui

To brain
To abomasum

To gut / feces

From lungs
To heart / lungs

CED Ist- stage larvae

tage larvae ww)

 

Fig. 226b. Parelaphostrongylus tenuis (first-stage larvae in
feces).

184
Parasites of Wildlife

Parelaphostrongylus tenuis

Common name: Meningeal worm or brain worm (Metastrong yloidea-Protostrongylidae).

Adult size: 10-15 cm. Prepatent period is 90 + 9 days.

Size of larvae: 300-400 pm, first-stage larvae in feces, with dorsal spine on kinky tail.

Importance: This is one of the most important parasites of wildlife. Adult P. tenuis live associated with the meninges on

 

 

the surface of the brain of white-tailed deer. The parasite is essentially nonpathogenic to white-tailed deer.
However, when infective larvae in snails are eaten by hosts such as moose, caribou, elk, mule deer, exotic species of
deer, llamas, and domestic sheep and goats, the infection is often lethal because larvac damage the spinal cord and
brain and cause severe inflammatory reactions to the CNS, resulting in incoordination, paralysis, and death.
Presence of infected white-tailed deer in an ecosystem may severely limit the survival of other susceptible hosts (see
bibliography).

Diagnosis:

 

At necropsy the adult worms are found on the brain of white-tailed deer or larvae in the the spinal cord or
brain tissue of susceptible hosts. Dorsal-spined larvae can be found in the feces of definitive hosts using the
Baermann funnel.
Note: There are close

 

related nematodes that also pass dorsal-s

 

pined larvae in the feces of wild ruminants (see

Table 55). There are still several unknown species of these worms, and there is considerable variation in the lengths
of the first-stage larvae. The definitive diagnosis is to find and identify the adult parasites in the host. Some of the
adults are in the muscles (P, odocoilei, P. andersoni, Elaphostrongylus cervi), the lungs (Varestrongylus alpenae,
Muellerins capillaris), or on the meninges of the brain (Parelapbostrongylus tenis).

Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC has been reported to be effective against early developing larval stages of P. tenuis,
but is not effective against adult parasites. Prevention: ‘Treatment every three weeks is recommended to prevent in-
fection.

 

Table 55. Lengths of first-stage dorsal-spined larvac®

Elapbostrongylus cervi 375-490 jun Mean = 425 jum
Muellerius capillari 240-340 um Mean = 280 4m
Parelaphostrongylus andersoni 310-420 jum Mean = 350 jn
Parelaphostrongylus odocoilei 340-385 yum Mean = 355 um
Parelaphostrongylus tenuis 310-380 jun Mean = 350 um
Varestrongylus alpenae 260-320 jum Mean = 300 um

 

Note: See Gray et al., 1985, Can J Zool 63:1449-1454; Pybus and Shave, 1984, / Wild! Dis 20:284-288,
*May not be accurate for diagnosis.

185
Section 12

   

Ce vad?
L Lag NX owl ,

Dead-end hosts.
ee

~— * od

u

 

a

Fascioloides — spetacorcatiae
magna

-

Eggsin manure (Usually fatal in

6 months)

  

 

Fig. 227a. Life cycle of Fascioloides magna. .
Fig. 227b. Fascioloides magna egg.

Fascioloides magna

Common name: Deer liver fluke or large American liver fluke (Fasciolidae).
Adult size: 4-6 cm in the liver parenchyma.
Size of egy: 150 jun x 70 jum, operculated, yellow. Prepatent period is 7 months.
Importance: This fluke is nonpathogenic in deer and elk. It is a fatal infection in domestic sheep and goats. Infected cat-
tle, bison, and Ilamas do not pass eggs (dead-end hosts). Reduced productivity is associated with infection in cattle.

Diagnosis: In deer and elk, use sedimentation test. In cattle and sheep, use serological tests.
Treatment in deer: Clorsulon, 7-21 mg/kg PO; less than 80% effective

Albendazole, 15 mg/kg PO; 90% effective

Triclabendazole, 20 mg/kg PO; more than 95% effective

 

Protostrongylus spp. So
Life Cycle

     

Fig, 228b. Protostrongylus sp. larva.

Fig. 228a. Protostrongylus spp.

Protostrongylus spp.

Common name: Bighorn sheep lungworm (Metastrong yloidea-Protostrongylidae).

Adult size: 10-20 mm.

Size of larva: 340-400 ttm x 20 jum, with straight, pointed tail. Prepatent period is 5 weeks.

Importance: The most important parasite of bighorn sheep. Transmitted transplacentally and may predispose to bacterial
pneumonia, especially in lambs. P. rushi is in the major air passages. P. stilesi is in the alveolar areas.

Diagnosis: Use Baermann funnel and look for first-stage larvae.

Treatment: Fenbendazole, 10 mg/kg PO q 24h x3d

Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC

Albendazole, 15 mg/kg PO

186
Parasites of Wildlife

    

Fig, 229a. Sarcocystis sp. cysts in elk heart. The white
cysts can be seen without magnification. Fig. 229b. Histologic section of Sarcocystis sp. in muscle.

Sarcocystis sp.

Common name: Nerve or muscle cysts (Protozoa-Apicomplexa).

Size: Usually microscopic, but some species, especially in ducks, elk, and rabbits, 1 mm or more.

Importance: Usually nonpathogenic, but large numbers may kill the host. Carnivores are the definitive hosts that pass the
infe

  

ive oocysts. These do not infect humans.
Diagnosis: Visual observation; usually by histology.
Treatment: None known; some ionophores such as monensin may ameliorate signs.

  

Fig. 230a. Psoroptes sp. (in bighorn sheep).

Fig. 230b. Psoroptes sp. (long, jointed

Psoroptes ovis pedicels).

Common name: Psoroptic mange mite (Acarina-Psoroptidae).

Adult size: Males, 500 tum; females, 750 um.

Importance: This mite can cause serious losses in bighorn sheep populations. By 2001, psoroptic mange in bighorns has
been reported in many states (Arizona, New Mexico, Wyoming, Montana, Washington, Idaho, Oregon, California)
and appears to be spreading. Affected sheep lose their hair and develop crusty lesions in the ears and often over the
entire body. Death occurs in severely affected animals. This condition apparently does not spread to cattle or sheep,
but mites can grow in ears of rabbits and deer.

Diagnosis: Visual observation of lesions and a skin scraping of the edge of a lesion to isolate mites. Psoroptes sp. mites
have long, jointed pedicels, which confirm the diagnosis.

_ Treatment: Ivermectin, 1.0-2.0 mg/kg body weight PO or SC x 7 d. A single injection of ivermectin at a high level may
not kill all the mites. Repeated treatments may be necessary.
Ivermectin, topically on lesions

    

187

 
Section 12

 

Elaeophora schneideri

Fig. 231. Elaeophora schneideri. Prepatent period is 4-5
months.

 

Fig. 232. Baylisascaris procyonis (in race ons). Prepatent
period is 5 weeks.
sattesnspionis
He
ee

Fig, 233. Trichinella spiralis larvae (arrows) in muscle
(bear).

 

188

Elaeophora schneideri

Common name: Arterial worm (Filarioidea).

Adult size: 5~12 cm, found in arterial system anterior
to the heart.

Importance: Found in mule deer; normally not patho-
genic. Transmitted by horseflies. In elk, blindness
and necrosis of skin on head may result. In sheep,
filarial dermatitis, “sorehead,” may occur in older
sheep. In moose, blindness may occur,

Diagnosis: Take a punch of ear skin, placed insaline;
look for live microfilariae.

Treatment: None.

Baylisascaris procyonis

Common name: Raccoon ascarid (Ascaridoidea).
Adult size: 12-23 cm, in small intestine.

30 jum x 70 pm.

Importance: This ascarid causes visceral larva migrans

Size of e}

 

in humans and CNS disorders in a variety of
birds and animals. Humans should use hygienic
measures when working with raccoons and rac-
coon feces. Eggs are not infective when passed in
feces and require approximately 30 days or more
to become infective.
Diagnosis: Fecal flotation. (Similar to Toxocara canis in
dogs).
Treatment: Fenbendazole, 20 mg/kg PO q 24h x 5d
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24h x 5d
Piperazine, 200 mg/kg PO
Pyrantel, 10 mg/kg PO

Trichinella spiralis

Common name: Trichina worm (Trichuroidea).

Larval cyst size: Up to 3 mm.

Importance: Transmissible to humans via ingestion of
meat. Found in many carnivores and other verte-
brates (see Fig. 163).

Larvae are encysted in muscle. For tissue

 

Diagnosi
squash, diaphragm is often used, or digest muscle
in 1% acid pepsin and look for larvae under a
dissecting microscope. Histology is used for diag-
nosis.

Treatment: None in wildlife.
   

Fig. 234. Onchocerca cervipedis (in deer).

 

Fig. 235. Anisakis/Phocanema (Pseudoterranova) spp. (in
fish).

 

Fig. 236. Cephenemyia sp. (in deer). One generation per
year.

189

Parasites of Wildlife

Onchocerca cervipedis

Common name: Skin worm (Filarioidea).

Adult size: Up to 20 cm, usually coiled on the surface
of the muscles or on the subcutaneous side of the
skin.

Importance: Not pathogenic, but seen by hunters.
Causes psychosomatic disease in humans.

Diagnosis: Can be seen in subcutaneous fascia (under

the skin), especially on front legs of mule deer.
Treatment: None

Anisakis/Phocanema (Pseudoterranova) spp.

Common name: Cod worm (Ascaridoidea)-
Adult size: Several cm, coiled in flesh.
Importance

 

Adults are in marine mammals; larval
stages are common in several kinds of fish. If eat-
en in raw or poorly cooked fish, the larval stages
can cause gastritis, vomiting, and psychosomatic
disease in humans. :

Diagnosis: Visual observation of fish flesh.

Prevention: Cook or freeze fish.

Treatment: For humans: Piperazine citrate 75 mg/kg q
24h x 2d (maximum of 4 g)

Pyrantel pamoate, 11 mg/kg, (maximum of 1 g)

Cephenemyia sp.

Common name: Deer throat bot (Diptera).
Adult size:
Importance: Found in retropharyngeal pouches of

1-3 cm.

 

throat in species of deer, elk, Hamas, and wild un-
gulates. Usually nenpathogenic, even though 50
or more may be present.

Diagnosis: Visual at necropsy.

Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg,

on
Section 12

 

 

Fig, 238. Cylicospirura sp. (in cougars).

 

Fig. 239. Dirofilaria immitis (in coyotes). Prepatent period
is 6 months.

190

Mesocestoides sp.

Common name: Tapeworm (Pseudophyllidae), Found
in felines and canines.

Size of egg: 50 11m x 40 jum, with internal hooks.

Importance: These are acquired from intermediate
hosts such as reptiles. Uncommon, but interesting,
Usually no pathogenicity associated with adult
worms, but larval stages may be pathogenic.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.

Treatment: Praziquantel, 5-50 mg/kg PO.

Cylicospirura sp.

Common name: Stomach worm (Spiruroidea).

Size of egg: 40 tim x 30 pm.

Importance: Found in most wild felids. Causes large
(2-3 cm) nodules in stomach with red worms in-
side. Pathogenicity is unknown, but ulcers and
hemorrhage are sometimes associated with the
parasites.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation or nodules found in
stomach at necropsy.

Treatment: Unknown, but ivermectin or fenbendazole
may be effective.

Dirofilaria immitis

Common name: Dog heartworm (Filaroidea). Found in
wild canines and occasionally felines.

Size of microfilaria: 310 jim x 7 jum.

Importance: Often fatal to coyotes, red wolves, and
wild canids.

Diagnosis: Microfilariae in blood (Knott's test).
Serologic tests (ELISA). At necropsy, worms are
found in right side of heart.

Treatment: Melarsomine, 2.5 mg/kg IM, twice, 24 h
apart

Prevention: Ivermectin, 0.006 mg/kg PO every 30 d

(See dog heartworm section.)
   

Fig, 240. Elaphostrongylus spp. (in reindeer).

 

   

242. Monoecocestus sp. (in porcupines). Prepatent pe-
riod is 70 days.

 

191

Parasites of Wildlife

Elaphostrongylus spp. a

Common name: European brain worm
{Rrotostromeylicae)

  
   
 
   
 
    
 
 
  
    
  
   
    
 

Importance: Nonpad
may cause menir
caribou, and rei:
epidural space of spit

muscles. This parasite |
fications because of its
some North American:
America, it has been fo

in Newfoundland

Diagnosis: Larvae in feces (u
Adults found in musel
Treatment: None known. —

Wellcomia evaginata

Common name: Pinworm (
Size of egg: 60 jum x SO pum.
Importance: Very cemmon ii

pathogenic.

Monoecocestus sp.

Common name: Tapeworm (Anopl
Size of egg: 85 jum x SS um, with 5
Importance: Very common in porcupines,
is unknown, but is probably relatively. nonpatho-
genic. Note: Isn’t it interesting that tapeworm —
eggs in porcupines have spines?
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24x3d
Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg PO
Praziquantel, 2.5-5.0 mg/kg PO or SC
Section 12

 

Fig. 243. Linognathus africanus (in deer).

 

Fig. 244. Lipoptena sp. (in deer).

 

Fig. 245. Soboliphyme baturini eggs (in martens).

192

Linognathus africanus

Common name: Sucking lice (Anoplura).

Size of adults: 2.5~5.0 mm. Life cycle is about 4 weeks.

Importance: May cause hair loss on face and body,
pruritus.

  

Diagnosis: Visual observation in hair. Using flashlight
to perform the examination is helpful.
Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg IM, SC, or PO
Organophosphate, powders or sprays
Pyrethrin, powders or sprays

Lipoptena sp.

Common name: Deer ked (Diptera). This is a wingless
fly.

Size of adults: 3-6 mm.

Importance: Very common on deer and elk. Usually
nonpathogenic.

Diagnosis: Visual observation of hair. Keds are often in
pairs.

Treatment: Organophosphate, powders or sprays

Pyrethrin, powders or sprays

Soboliphyme baturini

Common name: Marten stomach worm
(Dioctophymoidea).

Size of adults: Up to 38 mm, heavy robust bodies, with
a well-developed buccal capsule.

Size of eggs: 94 jum x 45 jum (our measurements).

Importance: Large worms in the stomach of martens,
especially in Alaska. Closely related to the giant
kidney worm of dogs. The pathogenicity is un-
known, but large numbers of worms are found in
healthy martens.

Diagnosis: Necropsy or fecal flotation.

Treatment: Unknown.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
       
    
   
   

 

Parasites of Wildlife

Ursicoptes americanus

Common name: Mange mite of bears.

Size of adults: 265-359 jim x 130-150 Lum.

Importance: Can cause clinical mange in captive and
free-ranging bears.

Diagnosis: Skin scraping to detect mites.

Treatment: Amitraz (0.025%) dip, every 2 weeks until
mites are no longer detected. Ivermectin may be
effective.

 
     

Common name: Bighorn sheep fringed tapeworm.

Size of egg packets: 174 jun x 145 pum.

Importance: Probably nonpathogenic, but may cause
bile duct proliferation and interfere with diges-
tion.

 

Diagnosis: Fecal flotation, or observe tapeworm seg-
ments on the fecal pellets. Adult tapeworms are
found in the bile ducts at necropsy.

Treatment: Fenbendazole, 10 mg/kg PO

Dermacentor sp.

Common name: Seed ticks or larval ticks.

Adult size: 700 tum x 500 jum (6 legs).

Importance: May cause infected animals to scratch,
may cause anemia, and may be responsible for
the transmission of diseases. Found on rodents
and many animals.

Diagnosis: Visual observation.

 

    

Treatment: Dust with pyrethrins, permethrins, car-
bamates, or organophosphates.
Sarcoptes scabiei

  
 

 
 

Common name: Mange m

Adult size: 500 jum x 400 jm
Importance: Causes sarcoptic mange
Affected animals experience ha

 
 
  
 

may occur, Common on foxes,

  

wolves. a
Diagnosis: Deep skin scraping; look for mites a
Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or PO

      
     
 

Toxoplasma gondii

Common name: Toxo.

Size of pseudocysts: 20-35 am.

Importance: Can be transmitted to humans.
Transmission occurs by cannibalism, ingestion of
oocysts, or congenitally. Cats are the only defini-
tive hosts, but all birds and mammals are suscep-
tible to infection and disease.

Disease: The disease is characterized by fever, anorexia,
lethargy, lymphadenopathy, myalgia, pneumonitis,
myocarditis, hepatitis, and encephalitis. Abortion
often occurs in ungulates.

Diagnosis: Identify pseudocyts in histological tissue sec-
tions, primarily CNS. Trophozoites can often be
seen see in amniotic fluid and other fluids.

 

Sl
Fig. 250. Pseudocyst of Toxoplasma gondii (protozoa) can

be found in CNS of any wild bird or mammal. Treatment: Sulfas and pyrimethamine.
Prevention: Do not eat raw meat, and prevent oral in-

gestion of oocysts from cat feces.

Diphyllobothrium latum

Common name: Broad fish tapeworm
(Pseudophyllidea).

Size of egg: 75 ym x 45 jum.

Importance: Transmitted by eating infected fish. May
compete for vitamin B,,, but usually not patho-
genic. Common in bears.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation or large tapeworm
segments in feces.

Treatment: Praziquantel, 5 mg/kg once PO (same for
humans).

Prevention: Do not eat raw fish.

 

"Fig. 251. Egg of Dipbyllobothriun latum (tapeworm in
bears and humans).

   
 

194

 
Parasites of Wildlife _

  

Fig. 253. Numerous trematode eggs (P. wescotti) in brain

Fig. 252. Eggs of Prouterina wescotti (fecal float).
tissue.

Prouterina wescotti

Common Name: Bear brain fluke (Trematoda: Prouterinidae).

Size of egg: 68 jun x 41 jum.

Size of adult: 2-4 mm.

Importance: This parasite has been found in the brain, lungs, and nasal sinuses of one black bear that died of neurologic
disease. It is very unusual for trematodes to enter neural tissue. Although the black bear may not be the natural
host, severe disease occurred. The complete case history is available (Foreyt et al., J Wild Dis 32:225-233, 1996).

Diagnosis: The best diagnosis is to examine nasal sinuses of bears demonstrating neurologic signs and find the 2- to
4-mm trematodes. Eggs may float in sugar flotation. In histologic sections, eggs and adult trematodes can be seen in
brain and lungs.

Treatment: None known.

oe

 

 

Fig. 254. Eggs of Gnatbostoma sp. from felids and rac-
coons. Eggs are 70 wm x 35 jum.

  

Fig. 255. Ornithonyssus sp. (mites) from the foot of
an elk. These are probably incidental parasites (1 mun
long).

 
  
  

 

Fig. 256, Larval chiggers (Trombicula sp.) found on
many kinds of animals. They usually bite and then
fall off. They are often orange and 1 mm long.

Fig. 257. Protostrongylus sp. larvae in the lings of
bighorn sheep (see Fig. 228a and b, for life cycle and diag-
nosis).

  
  
 

Ds ee

      
   

It pinworm (Passalurus
ambiguus) in the bit (note the bulb-type

esophagus, arrow! Fig. 259. Eggs of a pancreatic trematode, Eurytrema sp.,

froma cougar. Eggs are 45 jim x 35 jum.

IR

 

Fig. 261. Typical muskrat mite (very common on
muskrats).

Fig, 260. Anterior end of Thelazia sp. (the
eyeworm) from under the third eyelid of a
bighorn sheep.

196

   
 

Fig. 262. Nematodirella sp. eggs from a musk ox.

Bibliography

Beynon PH (ed.): Manual of Raptors, Pigeons and
Waterfowl. Ames, lowa, lowa State University Press,
1996, 364 pp.

Chapman JA, Feldhamer GA: Wild Mammals of North
America, Biology, Management, Economics. Baltimore,
Maryland, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982.

Davidson WR (ed): Diseases and Parasites of White-tailed
Deer. Miscellaneous Publication No. 7, Tall Timbers
Research Station, Tallahassee, Florida, 1981.

Davidson WR, Nettles VF: Field Manual of Wildlife
Diseases in the Southeastern United States.
Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study, The
University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, 1988.

Davis JW, Anderson RC (eds): Parasitic Diseases of Wild
Animals. Ames, lowa, lowa State University Press,
1971.

Davis JW, Anderson RC, Karstad LH, Trainer DO (eds):
Infectious and Parasitic Diseases of Wild Birds. Ames,
lowa, lowa State University Press, 197 1.

Dieterich RA (ed): Alaskan Wildlife Diseases. Institute of
Arctic Biology, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, Alaska,
1981.

Forrester DJ: Parasites and Diseases of Wild Mammals in
Florida. Gainesville, Florida, University Press of
Florida, 1992, 459 pp.

Fowler M (ed): Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine. 2nd edi-
tion, Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1986.

197

Parasites of Wildlife

   
    

Lymnaea stagnalis Lymnaea humilis

a,

Lymnaea palustris

Lymnaea caperta

Fig. 263. Several Lymnaea spp. that are intermediate hosts
for liver flukes (Fascioloides magna).

Fowler ME, Cubas ZS (eds.): Biology, Medicine and
Surgery of South American Wild Animals. Ames, lowa,
lowa State University Press, 2001, 572 pp.

Friend M (ed): Field Guide to Wildlife Diseases. Resource
Publication 167, U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish
& Wildlife Science, Washington, D.C., 1987.

Heidenreich M: Birds of Prey: Medicine and Management.
Ames, lowa, lowa State University Press, 294 pp.
1997.

Levine ND: Veterinary Protozoology. Ames, lowa, lowa
State University Press, 1985 414 pp.

Petrak ML (ed): Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds.
Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1982.

Samuel WM, Pybus M (eds.}: Parasitic Diseases of Wild
Mammals, 2nd edition. Ames, lowa, lowa State
University Press, 2001, 568 pp.

Stocker L. Practical Wildlife Care. Ames, lowa, lowa State
University Press, 2000, 296 pp.

Thorne ET (ed): Diseases of Wildlife in Wyoming.
Wyoming Game and Fish Department, Cheyenne,
Wyoming, 1982.

Wallach JD, Boever WJ: Diseases of Exotic Animals ~
Medical and Surgical Management. Philadelphia, W-B.
Saunders Co., 1983.

Williams ES, Barker IK (eds.): Infectious Diseases of Wild
Mammals, 3rd edition. Ames, lowa, lowa State
University Press, 2001, 576 pp.

Wobeser G: Diseases of Wild Waterfowl. New York,
Plenum Press, New York, 1981.

 

 
Section 13

PARASITES OF MARINE MAMMALS

Marine Mammals

 

Fig, 265. Marine mammals (Cetacea): whales, dolphins, porpoises.

199

 

Nya
 

007

JI Iv

Major Parasites

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 56. Major parasites of pinnipedia (seals, sea lions, and walrus: Table 57. Major parasites of cetacea (whales, dolphins, and porpoises)
Parasite Location Parasite Location
Trematodes Trematodes
Cryptocotyle Intestine Braunina Stomach and intestine
Zalophotrema Liver Campila Liver
Pricetrema Intestine Fasciola Liver
Hadwenius Intestine
Cestodes Leveasiella Intestine
Diphyllobothriun Intestine Nasitremer Air sinus and brain
Phyllobothriun Tissue Odbneriella Liver
Pholeter Stomach
Nematodes
Anisakis Stomach Cestodes
Ascaris Intestine Diphyllobothriun Stomach and intestine
Contracaecum Stomach Phyllobothriiumn Blubber
Dipetalonema Heart Strobiloce phalus Intestine
Dirofilaria Heart Tetraabothrius Intestine
Ostostrongylus Lung Trigonocotyle Intestine
Parafilaroides Lung
Porrocaccum Stomach Nematodes
Terranova Stomach Anisakis Stomach and intestine
Jucinaria Intestine Contracaccum Stomach and intestine

Acanthocephala
Corynosoma Intestine

Ectoparasites
Antaretophthirus (louse) Skin
Echinophthirius (louse) SI

 

kin
Halarachne (nasal mite) Nasal sinuses

Lepidophthirus (louse)

 

skin

 

Crassicauda
Halocereus
Pharurus
Phocanerna
Pserdalius
Stenurus

Terranova

Acanthocephala
Corynosoma

Ectoparasites
Cyamus (louse)

Kidney, muscle, and urogenital system
Lung

Air sinus, lung, and heart

Stomach

Lung and heart

bronchi

Stomach

Stomach and intestine

Skin

 

€] wonsas
   
 

Interna | parasites

 
  

le, 10 mg/kg PO
External parasites
Ivermectin, 0.2 m/kg PO

Cetaceans
Internal parasites

 

nthelmintics for marine mammals

 

Melarsomine (adult heartworm), 2.4 mg/kg, twice, 24 hours apart
Diethylcarbamazine citrate (heartworm preventative), 5 mg/kg daily administration
Ivermectin (heartworm prevention), 0.006 mg/kg every 30 days 2
apeworms and flukes), 10 mg/kg PO

Mebendazole, 15 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 2

Droncit (tapeworms and flukes), 10 mg/kg PO

Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO
Levamisole, 10 mg/kg PO

Niclosamide (tapeworms), 110 mg/kg, PO

Piperazine, 55 mg/kg PO

Internal Parasites

   
 

ion found in host
ey

Otostrongylus sp.
270-420 x 19-24 jun
105 mm x 1.3 mm
140-160 mm x 2 mm
Bronchi, trachea, heart
Less severe (pneumonia).

201

Parasites of Marine Mammals

 

  

Benzyl benzoate (20%) and benzene hexachloride (0.9%) applied with sponge (mites)

 

Parafilaroides sp.
240-265 x S-15 jun

6-18 mm x 90-120 tun

16-21 nam x 170 um

Lung parenchyma

Severe (bronchiolar obstruction)

 

DVYA
  
    
        
  
   
  
 

  
     
  

 

Nematodes (roundwot

nammals are
common. The ascarid g:

   

are usually infected by eating infected fis
The adult parasites are usually large ai
stomach or intestines. Adult worms are 3-10 cm.
Most dewormers listed in Table 58 are effective for
treatment. HOS
Prevention for humans is to cook fish well before
eating. Pyrantel is used to treat humans.

 

Trematodes (flukes) are also common in marine
mammals. Examples are listed in Tables 56 and 57.
Eggs are usually operculated at one end.

Acanthocephala are spiny-headed worms and are
found commonly in the intestines of marine mammals.

Their spiny heads are firmly imbedded in intestinal mu-
cosa. Acanthocephalans often appear yellow or orange

at necropsy.

Tapeworms (cestodes) are common in marine
mammals. The broad fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium
sp.) is especially common in those animals that eat fish.
Pseudophyllidean tapeworms like Diphyllobothrium
spp. are the most common type of tapeworm in marine
mammals and have operculated eggs. Tapeworms are
often nonpathogenic and can be treated with prazi-
quantel.

 

Fig, 271. Typical tapeworm eggs.

202

 
   

Fig. 273. Braunina cordiformis (trematode), 165 ym x
97 jun. Photo by M. Dailey. Used with permission.

   
    
 

   
   

Fig. 274. Zalophotrema hepaticum (trematode), 73 ttm x Fig. 275. Corynosoma sp. (acanthocephala), 79 tm x
48 jum. Photo by M. Dailey. Used with permission. 24 um. Photo by M. Dailey. Used with permission.

WYER

Fig. 277. Synthesium sp. (trematode), 56 pum x 33 Hm.
Photo by M. Dailey. Used with permission.
  
   

 
   

Fig, 278. Anisakis sp. (nematode-ascarid), 50 jum x 40 jum.
Photo by M. Dailey. Used with permission.

50 jim. Photo by M. Dailey. Used with permission.

 

amp. "18 780. Crassicauda sp. (nematode). Eggs are larvated,

55 jum x 37 um. Photo by M. Dailey. Used with permis- . - - : :
? sion. Fig. 281. Antarctophthirus sp. (louse), 3 mm.

       

*

Fig. 283. Orthohalarachne attenuata. Mites are in the na-
sopharynx. Photo by M. Dailey. Used with permission.

204
   

Fig, 284. Nasitrema sp. (trematode) egg. Photo by M.
Dailey. Used with permission.

 

Fig, 285. Otostrongylus sp. (Iungworm larva) nematode.
Photo from M. Dailey. Used with permission.

. Uncinaria lucasi (nematode) eggs.

 

Parasites of Marine Mammals

   
 
   
  
  
 
   
   
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 

Nasitrema sp.

Otostrongylus sp.

Name: Lungworm
Hosts: Pinnipeds
Size of larvae: 260 jt
Importance: Located in the |
promise respiration and
monia. ac
Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/k;

Uncinaria lucasi

Name: Hookworm (nematode)
Hosts: Northern fur seal primarily.
Size of eggs: 135 jum x 85 wm
Importance: Hookworms are |
tine in pups, bhubber and fat in adults.
Transmitted transmammarily an
mortality in pups (Lyons, 1994).
Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO

 

205
>

bh
w

Section 13

Bibliography

Brown RJ, Smith AW, Keyes MC: Sarco
ern fur seal. J Wild] Dis 10:53,1974.
Brown RJ, Smith AW, Keyes MC, et al.: Lesions associ

stis in the north-

 

 

ted

  

with fatal hookworm infections in the northern fur seal.
AVMA 165:804, 1974.

Conlogue GJ, Ogden JA, Foreyt Wi]:
vere heartworm infection ina harbor seal. Ver
Med/Small Anim Clin 75:1184-1187, 1980.

Dailey MD, Brownell RL: A checklist of marine parasites.
In Ridgway $H (ed): Mammals of the Sea. Chailes C.
Thomas, 1972, pp. 528-566.

Dailey MD: Diseases of Mammalia: Cetacea. In Kinne ©

Pediculosis and se-

 

(ed): Diseases of Marine Animals, Volume IV, Part 2.
Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany, Biologische
Anstalt Helgoland, 1985, pp. 815-841

Dailey MD: Parasitology - Basic Considerations (Cetacea,
Pinnipedia and Sirenia). In Fowler ME (ed): Z00 and
Wild Animal Medicine. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders
and Co., 1986, pp. 781-789.

Eley TJ: Dipetalonema spirocanda in Alaskan marine
mammals, J Wild! Dis 17:65, 1981.

Forrester DJ: Parasites and Diseases of Wild Mammals in

rida, 1992,

    

  

 

Florida, Gainesville, University Press of F
459 pp.

Gosselin JE, Measures, L. Redescription of F
(Parafilaroides) gymnurus (Railliet, 1899) (Nematoda:
Metastrongyloidea), with comments on other species in
pinnipeds. Can J Zool 75:359-370, 1997.

Howard EB, Britt JO Jr, Matsumoto GK: Parasitic dis-
cases. In Howard EB (cd): Pathobiology of Marine
Mammal Diseases, Volume I. Boca Raton, Florida,
CRC Press, Inc., 1983, pp. 119-232.

Hsu CK, Melby EC, Altman NH, et al.: Coccidiosis in
harbor seals. JAVMA 164:700, 1974.

Inskeep W, Gardiner CH, Harris RK, Dubey JP, Goldston
RE Toxoplasmosis in Atlantic bortle-nosed dolphins
(lursops truncatus). | Wildl Dis 26:377-382, 1990.

Johnston DG, Ridgway SH: Parasitism in some marine
mammals. JAVA 155:1064 1969.

Kim KG, I laas VL, Keyes MC: Populations, microhabirat

  

aroides

 

 

  

206

preference, and effects of infestation of two species of
Orthohalarchne (Halarachnidae:Acarine) in the north-
erm fur seal. J Wildl Dis 16:45, 1980.

Kinne O: Diseases caused by parasites. In Kinne © (ed):
Diseases of Marine Mammals. Hamburg, Federal
Republic of Germany, Biologische Anstalt Helgoland,
1985, pp. 717-750.

Lauckner G: Diseases of Mammalia: Pinnipedia. In Kinne

 

© (ed): Diseases of Marine Animals, Volume IV, Part 2.
Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany, Biologische
Anstalt Helgoland, 1985, pp. 713-754.

Lyons ET: Vertical transmission of nematodes: Emphasis
on Uneinaria hicasi in northern fur seals and
Strongyloides westeri in equids. J Helminthol Soc Wash
61:169-178, 1994.

Measures 1, Gosselin JE. Helminth parasites of ringed seal
Phoca hispida from northern Quebec, Canada. |
Helminthol Soc Wash 61:240-244, 1994.

Morimitsu T, et al Parasitic octavus neuropathy as a
cause of mass stranding of Odontoceti. J Wildl Dis
72:469-472, 1986.

Morimitsu ‘I, ct al.: Histopathology of cighth cranial nerve
of mass stranded dolphins at Goto Islands, Japan. |
Wildl Dis 28:656-658, 1992.

Onderka DK; Prevalence and pathology: of nematode in-
fections in the lungs of ringed seals (Phoca hispida) of
the western Arctic of Canada. | Wildl Dis 25:218-224,
1989.

Perry ML: A new species of Dipetalonema from the
C
Stellar sea lion (Nematoda:Filarioidea). J Parasit
53:1076, 1967.

Stroud RK, Dailey MD: Parasites and associated pathology
observed in pinnipeds stranded along the Oregon coast.
| Wildl Dis 14:292, 1978.

Taylor AER, Brown DH, Heyneman D, et al: Biology of
filarid nematode Dipetalonema spirocauda (Leidy,
1858) from the heart of captive harbor seals and sea li-
ons, together with pathology of the hosts. J Parasit
47.971, 1961.

Woodward JC, Zam $G, Caldwell DK, et al.: Some para-
sitic diseases of dolphins. Pathol Ver 6:257, 1969.

 

 

 

 

  

re

 

 

 

 

lifornia sea lion and a report of microfilariae from a

 
Section 14

PARASITES OF REPTILES

Common Reptiles

 

Fig. 287. Reptiles (snakes and lizards).

 

Fig. 288. Reptiles (turtles/tortoises/alligators/crocodiles).

207

 
Section 14

Major Parasites
Table 60. Para

 

of reptile

(snakes and lizards)

 

Parasites Location Parasites Location
Protozoa Nematodes
Entamoeba invadens Intestine Ascarids: Ophidascaris, Intestine/stomach

Eimeria\lsospora spp. (coccidia)

Cryptosporidium sp.

Blood protozoa (Haemoprotens,

nod ium

 

Hepatozoan, Pla
Hlagellates: Trichomonas,

 

 

Intestine

Intestine/extra-intestinal

Blood or tissues

Polydelphis, Hexametra

Hookworms: Kalicephalus

Filarial worms: Oswaldofilaria,
Foleyella, Macdonaldius
Capillaria sp.

 

 

 

 

 

Intestine
Lungs/SQ/

circulatory system
Intestine

 

 

 

 

Leishmania Trypanosoma Blood or tissues Strongyloides/Rhabdias Intestine
Ciliates: Balantidium sp. Intestine Pinworms (oxyurids) : Intestine
Lungs/intestine several species
‘Trematodes (renifers) pirurids: Abbreviata, SQvlungs
Lechriochis sp. Lungs Eustrongyloides larvae,
Dasymetra sp. Oral cavity’ Physaloptera spp.
Ochetostoma sp. Oral cavity
Stomatrema sp. Oral cavity Acanthocephala
Zengorchis sp. Stomach Sphaerechinorbynchus sp. Intestine
Styphylodora sp. Urinary tract
Spirorchis/learedius sp. Circulatory system Mites
Opbionyssus natricis Skin
Cestodes Entonyssus, Ophiopnenmicola Lungs
Pseudophyllideans: Bothriditum, Intestine
Bothriocepbalus, Spirometra Ticks Skin
Sparganum larvae (pleurocercoids) — Muscles/SQ Amblyomma, Aponomma,
Mesocestoides larvac Anywhere Iyalonmna, Ornithodoros
(retrathyridia)
Proteocephalus, Acanthotaenia, Intestine Fly larvae
Crepidobothrium, Opbiotaenia Sarcophaga SQ
Pentastomes (several species) Lungs
‘Table 61. Parasites of reptiles (turtles and alligators)
‘Turtles/ortoises: Location Alligators/Crocodiles Location
Nematodes Nematodes
Augusticaecum sp. Intestine Brevimulticaecwn sp. Stomach,
Camallanus sp. Intestine Dujardinascaris sp. Intestine/stomach
Sprionoura sp. Colon
Spiroxys sp. Colon Trematodes
Kalicephalus sp. Intestine Acanthostomum sp. Intestine
Proatractis sp. Colon Archaeodiplostomun sp. Intestine
Crocodilicola sp. Intestine
=> “‘Trematodes Polycotyle sp. Intestine
Dictyangium sp. Stomach Pseudocrocodilicola sp. Intestine
PPP beroninus sp. Lungs
a Neopolystoma sp. Urinary bladder Pentastomes
Telorchis sp. Intestine Sebekia sp. Lungs
Acanthocephala Leeches
Nevechinorbynchus sp. Intestine Placobdella spp. Mouth/skin
Protozoa
Entamoeba invacens Intestine
Eimeria spp. Intestine
Balantidium sp. Intestine

 

208
Parasites of Reptiles

      
   

 

Fig. 289. Eges of ascarids (Ophidascaris sp.) from a rat- Fig. 290. Eggs of hookworms (Kalicephalus sp.) from a
tlesnake. Nematode eggs are 90 ptm x 70 jim. rattlesnake. Nematode eggs are $0 tm x 40 jum.

 

Fig. 291. Eggs of Kapsultaenia sp. (tapeworm). Eggs are Fig. 292. Eggs of a pinworm (probably Pharyngodon sp.)
90 jm x70 jum. Photo by S. Barnard. Used with permis- (nematode), 87 jum x 42 jim. Photo by S. Barnard. Used
sion. with permission.

 

a

Fig. 293. Eggs of a trematode (Ocetosoma sp.). Eggs are Fig, 294, Eggs of Strongyloides sp., a nematode. Eggs are
40 um x 22 jum. Photo by S. Barnard. Used with permis- 72 um x 35 um. Photo by S. Barnard. Used with permission.
sion.

209
   
  

Fig. 296. Eggs of Capillaria sp. a nematode from a rat-
tlesnake. Eggs are $0 pm x40 um. ‘

   

Fig.
common in lizards. Eggs are 142 jum x 35 jim. Photo bj
Barnard. Used with permission.

Fig. 297. Eggs of Oswaldcruzia sp., a hookworm (nema-
tode), Eggs are 78 tm x 45 tm. Photo by $. Barnard.
Used with permission.

    
      

Fig. 300. Eggs of Oochoristica sp., a tapeworm from
lizard. Eggs are 40 um x 32 um. Photo by S. Barnard.
Used with permission. :

210

 
Cryptosporidium Fig. 302. Cysts of Balantic
um in diameter.

between 50 and 100 jum.

"Drugs for reptiles*

from a rattlesnake. Cysts are usually

     
 

Parasites of Reptiles

a

ig. 303. Eimeria sp. (coccidia) fro
rattlesnake. Oocysts are 20 um x
18 pm.

10 SP.

 

 

Drug

Dosage (mg/kg of body weight)

 

  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  

des Dichlorvos (Task)

: Fenbendazole (Panacur)

Ivermectin (Ivomec), NO TURTLES
Levamisole HCL (Tramisol)
Mebendazole (Telmin)

Pyrantel pamoate (Strongid T)

Bunamidine (Scolaban)
Dichlophen (several names)
Niclosamide (Yomesan)
Praziquantel (Droncit)

None are reliable
Experimentally, Praziquantel or
Albendazole can be tried.

Dimetridazole (Emtryl)
Metronidazole (Flagyl)
Sulfadimethoxine (Albon)
Sulfamethazine

DriDi (a silica dessicant)
Dichlorovos “no pest strip”

Ivermectin (Ivomec)

for turtles.

211

12.5
50

50
200
150
7.5

10 (for flagellates, 5 days)
125-275 (for amoebae, 8 days)
45-90 (for coccidia)

40-75 (for coccidia)

Topical application
Hang in cage for a few hours
0.2 SQ, IM, or PO

    
    

Ie
rs
=P

Section 14

  

Fig. 304. An unknown pentastome (weird parasite). Eggs are
95 jm x 78 jim. Photo by 5. Barnard. Used with permission.

Internal Parasites

Entomoeba sp.

Common name: Entomoeba sp. (a protozoan—amoeba).
Size of trophozoite: 9-38 um x 8-30 hm.

Size of cyst: 9-24 jun in diameter, with one to four nuclei.
Transmission: Ingestion of cysts from affected feces

 

Fig. 305. Entomoeba sp. (arrow) from a rattlesnake.

Importance: Can cause anorexia, weight loss, blood and mucus in feces, vomiting, and intestinal ulceration. It is most

pathogenic in snakes and carnivorous lizards. Death often occurs 2 to 10 weeks after infection.

Prevention: Cysts can survive more than 2 weeks in the environment. Keep cages clean and quarantine sick animals. Do

not mix lizards or snakes with turtles or crocodilians.

Treatment: Metronidazole, 125-250 mg/kg q 24 h x 3 d. Do not exceed 400 mg per day.

Paromomycin, 40 mg/kg P@

Bibliography

Ayala SC. Checklist, host index, and annotated bibliogra-
phy of Plasmodium from reptiles. | Protozool,
25:87-100, 1978.

Barnard SM,$J Upton: A Veterinary Guide to the
Parasites of Reptiles. Volume 1, Protozoa. Malabar,
Florida, Krieger Publishing Company, 1994.

Brownstein DG, Standberg, JD, Montaili, RJ, Bush, M,
Fortner J: Cryptosporidium in snakes with hypertrophic
gastritis. Vet Pathol 14:606, 1972.

Cooper JE: Disease in East African snakes associated with
Kalicephalus worms (Nematoda: Diaphocephalidae).
Vet Rec 89:385, 1971

Flynn, RJ: Parasites of Laboratory Animals. Ames, lowa,
lowa State University Press, 1973.

Fowler M (ed): Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine. 2nd edi-
tion. Philadelphia, W. B. Saunders Co., 1986

Frank W: Endoparasites. In Cooper, JE, Jackson, OF (eds):
Diseases of the Reptilia, Volume 1. London, Academic
Press, 1981, pp. 291-358

Gardiner CH, Fayer R, Dubey JP: An Atlas of Protozoan

212

Parasites of Animal Tissues. U.S. Dep. Agriculture
Handbook No. 651, Washington, DC 83 pp, 1988.
Klein TA, Young DG, Greiner EC, Telford SR, Butler JF:

Development and experimental transmission of
Schellackia golvani and Schellackia occidentalis by in-
gestion of infected blood-feeding arthropods. Int J
Parasitol, 18:259-267, 1988

Lichtenfels JR and Lavies B: Mortality in red-sided garter
snakes, Thamnophis sirtalis parietalis, due to larval
nematode Eustrongylides sp. Lab Anim Sci 26:465,
1976.

Marcus LC: Veterinary Biology and Medicine of Captive
Amphibians and Reptiles. Philadelphia, Lea and
Febiger, 1981

Telford SR: Parasitic diseases of reptiles. J. Ant Vet Med
Assoc, 159:1644-162, 1971.

Telford SR: Haemoparasites of reptiles. In Hoff GL, Erye
FL, Jacobsen ER (eds): Diseases of Amphibians and
Reptiles. New York, Plenum Press, 1984, pp. 385-517.

Zwart P, Truyens EHA: Hexamitiasis in tortoises. Vet
Parasitol, 1:175-183, 1975.

 
Section 15

PARASITES OF HUMANS

Location of Major Parasites

Sarcoptes scabiei in skin

 

;
Liver
hydatid cyst of Echinococcus
Fasciola hepatica

| Small Intestine

 

Giardia sp.
Cryptosporidium sp.
Ascaris lumbricoides
Necator americanus
Strongyloides stercoralis
Taenia spp.

Dipylidium caninum
Diphyllobothrium latum

»

Fig. 306. Location of the common parasites of humans.

WT

213

 

Brain

 

 

 

Taenia solium - cysticerci

Pediculus humanus (hair)

 

Lungs

 

 

 

Paragonimus westermani

 

Large Intestine

Trichuris trichiura
Enterobius vermicularis
Schistosoma spp. (in veins)

Pthirus pubis (hair)
Section 15

Common Parasites

Table 63. Common human parasites

 

 

 

Organism Parasite or Disease Treatment ____ Dose
Protozoa
Giardia Giardiasis Furazolione 100 mg q 6h x 7-10d
Metronidazole 250 mg qShx 5d
Paromomycin 8-35 mg/kg q Shx 7d
Seenidazole 2 gonce or 30 mg/kg once
Tinidazole 2 g once or 30 mg/kg once
Cryptosporidium Cryptosporidiosis Paromomycin 35 mg/kg q Shx 7d

Nematodes
Ascaris Roundworm
Enterobius Pinworm
Necator Hookworm
Strongyloides Threadworm
Trichuris Whipworm

Cestodes
‘Taenia saginata Beef tapeworm
Taenia solium Pork tapeworm
Taenia solinn (cysts) Cysticercosis
Dipylidium Flea tapeworm
Echinococcus Hydatid cyst
Dipbyllobothrium Fish tapeworm

Supportive therapy

Albenctazole
Ivermectin
Mebenclazole
Pyrantel pamoate
Piperazine

Albendazole

Mebendazole
Pyrantel pamoate

Albendazole
Pyrantel pamoate
Mebendazole

Ivermectin
Albendazole

Albendazole
Mebendazole

Praziquantel
Praziquantel
Praziquantel
Albendazole
Surgery
Praziquantel
Albendazole
Mebendazole

Surgery

Praziquantel

214

Fluids and electrolytes

400 mg one

12 mg once

100 mg q 12h x 3d

11 mg/kg once (maximum f g)
75 my/ky (maximum 3.5 g)
weeks

400 mg once, repeat in

 

Nw

100 mg once, repeat in 2 weeks

11 mg/kg once (maximum 1g),
repeat in 2 weeks

400 mg once

11 mg/kg (max 1g) q 24hx 3d

100 mgq I2hx3d

0.2 mgfkg q 24 hx 2d
400 mg q I2hx 3d

400 mg once
100 mg q 12 hx 3d

5-10 mg/kg, once

5-10 mg/kg once

50 mg/kg q 24h x 14d
5 mefky q Sh x 28-30 d
5-10 mg/kg, once

400 mg q 12h x 28d

40 mg/kg, daily for months

5-10 mg/kg once
human parasites (continued)

 

Parasite or Disease Treatment

 

- Liver fluke Bithionol
: Praziquantel 25 mg/kg q 8

Bithionol 30-50 mg/kg q 4 Sh x 14
Praziquantel 25 mg/kg q Shx2d

Oxamniquine 15 mg/kg, once
Praziquantel 40-60 mg/kg q Sh x 1d

wimmer’s itch Certicosteroid cream Topical

Scabies Ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg

Body and head louse Permethrins 0.2%
Ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg

Pubic louse Permethrins 0.2 %

 

ig. 07. Ascaris lumbricoides Fig. 308. Enterobius vermicularis
idworms). Eggs are 80 jum long. (pinworms). Eggs are 75 tm long.

(protozoan). Oocysts
~ mately 5 yum lor

 
 

Fig. 313. Pediculus hominis (head louse).

 

Fig. 314. Pthirus pubis (pubic louse).

 

Fig. 315. Sarcoptes scabiei (scabies mite).

216

External Parasites

Pediculus hominis

Common name: Human head lice.

Adult size: 2-3 mm on the head in the hair. Eggs (nits)
are attached to the hairs.

Importance: These are sucking lice and suck blood.
They cause itching of the scalp. These lice are
host specific in humans.

Diagnosis: Find the eggs, adults, or nymphs on the
head.

Treatment: See Table 63.

Permethrin shampoos are the standard treatment, but
many lice are resistant.

Pthirus pubis

Common name: Pubic lice.

Adult size: 1 mm, with large claws, in pubic hair. Eggs
(nits) are attached to pubic hairs.

Importance: These are sucking lice and suck blood.
They cause itching of the pubic area. These lice
are host specific in humans.

Diagnosis: Find the eggs, adults, or nymphs in the pu-
bic area.

Treatment: See Table 63.

Permethrin shampoos are commonly used.

Sarcoptes scabiei

Common name: Scabies mites.

Adult size: 400-600 um. Adults, nymphs, larvae (6
legs), and eggs are in the skin

Importance: Cause severe itching (“Norwegian itch”).
Human scabies mites are relatively host specific in
humans.

Diagnosis: Skin scraping. Find eggs, larvae, nymphs, or
adults.

Treatment: See Table 63

Ivermectin is often effective.
Bibliography

Bell TA, Treatment of Pedictlus bumanus vac, capitis infes-
ration in Cowlitz County, Washington, with ivermectin
and the LiceMeister comb. Pediatr Infect Dis J
17:923-924, 1998.

Burkhart KM, Burkhart CN, Burkhart CG: Update on
therapy: ivermectin is available for use against lice.
Infect Med 14:689, 1997.

Campbell WC: Ivermectin, an antiparasitic agent. Med Res
Rev 13:61-79, 1993.

Coleman R: The use of ivermectin inthe treatment of sca-
bies. Ir Med J 89:167, 1996.

Downs AM, Stafford KA, Coles GC: Susceptibility of
British head lice, Pedicrlus capitis, to imidacloprid and
fipronil. Med Vet Entomol 14:105-107, 2000.

Glaziou P, Cartel JL, Alzicw P, et al: Comparison of iver-
meetin and benzyl benzoate for treatment of scabies.
Trop Med Parasitol 44:33 1-332, 1993.

Glaziou P, Nyguyen LN, Moulia-Pelat JP, ct al.: Efficacy of

 

217

Parasites of Humans

ivermectin for the treatment of h
capitis). Trop Med Parasitol 45:

id lice (Pediculosis
3-254, 1994.

  

   

Goddard J: Physicians Guide to Arthropods of Medical

Importance. 3rd edition. Boca Raton, Florida, CRC
Press, 1999, 440 pp.

Huffam SE, Currie BJ: Ivermectin for Sarcoptes scabiei hy-
perinfestation. [it J Infect Dis 2:152-154, |

Meinking TL, Taplin D, Hermida JL, ct al: The t
of scabies with ivermectin. N Engl | Med 333:26-30,
1995

Ottesen EA, Campbell WC: Ivermectin in human medi-
cine. J Antimicrob Chemother 34:195-203, 1994.

Rahman WA: Comparative trials using albendazole and

   

 

 

-atment of helminths in school-
children on Penang, Malaysia. Southeast Asian | Trop
Med Public Health 27:765-767, 1996.

Youssef MYM, Sadaka HAH, Eissa MM, et al opical
application of ivermectin for human ectoparasites. An {
Trop Med Hyg 53:652-653, 1995.

mebendazole in the tr

 

 

 
Section 16

COMMON ARTIFACTS IN FECES

Artifacts

 

Fig. 321. Plant root hair at arrow (often confused with lar-
vae). Ascarid eggs are also in the photo.

 

219

 
    

Fig. 322. Yeast (in chains, arrow) are often confused with Fig. 323. Spyrogyra (an algae), “bedspring artifact”
coccidia. (arrow).

 

Fig. 324. Thrips (free-living insects) found occasionally in Fig. 325. Grain mite eggs with mite inside egg. Grain mites
dog feces when collected from the ground. occur in feed, and eggs pass in feces. Eggs are big, usually
over 100 tm long.

  

Fig. 326. An incidental mite (Acarus sp.) and Acarus sp. Fig. 327. Ascaris foreyti, 1,778 mm long.
eggs in feces. Eggs are approximately 100-130 jim long.

220

 
   
   

a

Fig. 329. A spurious mite in dog feces.

Fig. 330 The horsehair worm.

   

Microscopic seeds from these microscopic seed
heads often look like parasite eggs. These seeds resem-
ble tiny Trichuris eggs to some degree.

Mites and mite eggs are often seen in feces. Some
of these mites are environmental mites that are ingested
and pass out in feces. Some mites are the result of ani-
mals licking themselves, and some mites are spurious
parasites that are the result of ingesting prey species
that have mites. This mite is Cnemidocoptes, a bird
mite in dog feces. Apparently, this dog ate an infected
bird.

  
 
 
     
      

 
 

The “horsehair worm” (Gord:
livestock waterers, freshwater springs,
from springs, toilets, kitchen sinks, ¢
parasites of vertebrates. These are |
6-10 inches long. ce
Section 17

TABLES

Table 64. Metric / English conversion factors and measures of concentration

Metric / English Conversion Factors:

 

 

 

1 kg = 1,000¢ = 2.21b
lg = 1,000 mg 0.035 oz
il = 1,000 ml or ce = 1.058 qt
1 ml or ce = 0.034 fluid oz
Iml = 1,000 4
1 lof water weighs 1 kg
English / Metric Conversion Factors
Tb = 453.68 = 0.454 kg
1 oz 28.35 g
1 pt of water weighs approximately 1 Ib
1 gal of water weighs approximately 8.34 Ib
I gal = 4qt = 37851
Lge = pr = 0.9461
I pt = 04731
1

fluid o7 = 29.6 ml or cc

Measures of Concentration

 

T ppm = Ia
= Lllkg
= 0,0001%
0.013 oz in 100 gal of water
1 percent = 10,000 ppm
10 gh
= 1.33 oz by weight/gal of water
= 8.34 Ib/100 gal
0.1% = 1,000 ppm =
0.01% = 100 ppm =
0.001% = 10 ppm =
0.0001% = I ppm =

1,000 mi/l
100 m/l
10 mil

1 mil

 

 

ce, cubic centimeter; g, gram; gal, gallon; kg, kilogram, |, liters Ib, pound; mg, milligram; ml, milliliter; oz, ounces

ppm, parts per million; pt, pint; qt, quart; 4tl, microliter.

223
Section 17

Table 65. Temperature, length, and volume conversion chart

 

 

‘Temperature Length Volume

°C °F cm mm inch liters quarts
100-212 2.54 25.4 1 1 Ll
90 194 5.08 50.8 2 2 2
80 176 10.16 101.6 4 3 3.2
70 158 20.32 203.2 8 4 4.2
60 140 30.48 304.8 12 5 5.3
50 122 40.64 406.4 16 6 6.3
40 104 50.80 508.0 20 7 74
35 95 60.96 609.6 24 8 8.5
30 86 7112 7ULA2 28 9 905
25 77 $1.28 $12.8 32

20 68 91.44 914.4 36

15 59

10 50

5 41

0 32

-5 23

0) 14

-15 5

20 4

-25 0-13

30-22

-40 40

 

Table 66. Abbreviations used in text

 

 

BID ‘Twice a day

BW Body weight

CBC Complete blood count
CNS Central nervous system
d Day

ELISA Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
h Hour

IM Intramuscular(ly)

Iv Intravenous(ly)

PO By mouth

ppm Parts per million

q Every

Sc Subcutaneously

SD Standard deviation

 

224
INDEX

Numbers in bold italic represent species description.
When a comma precedes spp., more than one species

form is given.

Abbreviations used in text, 224
Abdominal worm, 95
Acanthocephala, 201, 203

classification of, 12
Acariasis

in cats, 52

in dogs, 19

in pigs, 139
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus, 56, 57
Alaria spp., 30, 31
Algae, in feces, 220
Alligators, parasites of. See Reptiles, parasites of
Alveolar hydatid disease, 19
Amblyonuma, 168
Amoebiasis, 19
Ancylostoma spp., 19, 50

in cats, 54, 55

in dogs, 22, 23, 50
Anisakis/Phocanema (Psendoterranova) spp., 189
Anisakis sp., 201, 204
Anoplocephala, spp 121, 130, 131
Antarctophthirus sp., 204
Anthelmintics

for birds, 156, 157

for cats, 53

for cattle, 77, 78

for dogs, 20

for goats, 78

for hedgehogs, 171

for horses, 124, 125, 132, 133

for humans, 214

for llamas, 116

for marine mammals, 202

for pigs, 140

for rabbits, 171

for ratites, 167

for reptiles, 211

for sheep, 78
Arachnida, classification of, 13
Argas persicus

in birds, 164

in ratites, 168
Arterial worm, 188
Arthropoda, classification of, 13
Artifacts in feces, 219-221
Ascariasis, 139

225

Index

Ascarid (roundworm)

in birds, 153, 158, 159

in cats, 50, 54, 55

in dogs, 19, 21, 22, 23

in humans, 214

in pigs, 137, 142, 143

in ratites, 168, 169

in reptiles, 209

in wildlife, 188
Ascaridia, spp. See Ascarid (roundworm)
Ascaris sum, 137, 142, 143
Ascarops strongylina, 137, 146

Bahesia, spp.
in cats and dogs, 47
in dogs, 44
diagnosis of, 4
in horses, 130, 131
in ruminants, 92, 93
Baermann technique, 6
Balantidium, spp.
in pigs, 137, 148
in reptiles, 211
Baylisascaris, spp.
in ratites, 168
in wildlife, 188
Bear brain parasite, 195
Bears, parasites of, 181, 193, 194, 195. See also
Wildlife, parasites of
Beaver, parasites of, 181. See also Wildlife, parasites of
BID, defined, 224
Bighorn sheep, parasites of, 181, 187, 193, 196. See
also Wildlife, parasites of
Birds
anthelmintics for, 156, 157
zoonotic diseases associated with, 154
Birds, parasites of, 153-165
ly, location on, 154

  

ia species table, 155
external, 163-165
fecal eggs and oocysts, 153
internal, 158-162
Bison, parasites of, 181. See also Wildlife, parasites of
Bladderworm. See Capillaria, spp., aerophila, in cats
Blood smear for parasite detection, 4, 7
Blowfly, 99
Bolbosoma sp., 203
Bot fly
in cats and dogs, 41
in cattle, 99
in sheep, 100
Bovicola, spp., 102, 103
Index

Brain worm, 191. See also Meningeal worm
Braunina cordiformis, 203

Brisket worm, 94

Broad fish tapeworm, 194

Binostomum, spp., 84, 85

BW, defined, 224

Calibration of microscope, 8
Camelostrongylus, 117
Canine babesiosis, ticks as vector of, 44
Capillaria, spp.
in birds, 153, 158, 159
in cats, 50, 56, 57
in dogs, 37
in llamas, 115, 117
in reptiles, 210
in ruminants, 86, 87
caribou (reindeer), parasites of, 181. See also Wildlife,
parasites of
Tassowaries, parasites of. See Ratites, parasites of

 

Cc
Cats, parasites of, 51-62

 

external
car mite, 43
fur mite, 43
mange mite, 62
fecal eggs and oocysts, 50
internal, 54-61
ascarid (roundworm), 50, 54, 55
bladderworm, 56, 57
coccidia, 50, 61
flea tapeworm, 50, 58, 59
Giardia canis, 61
hookworm, 54, 55
lung fluke, 56, 57
lungworm, 56, 57
Sarcocystis sp., 60
tapeworm, 50, 58, 59
toxo, 60
location on host body, 51
protozoan parasites, 47
Cats, wild, parasites of, 183, 196. See also Wildlife,
parasites of
Cattle
anthelmintics for, 77, 78, 79
zoonotic diseases of , 70
Cattle, parasites of. See also Cattle, sheep, and goats,
parasites of
coccidia in, 69
fecal eggs and oocysts, 69
location on host body, 70
Cattle, sheep, and goats, parasites of, 69-108
external, 97-108

226

flies, 98-101
lice, 102-103
mites, 105-108
ticks, 104-105

internal, 80-97
abdominal worm, 95
Babesia, 92, 93
bankrupt, or small stomach, worm, 80, 81
barber's pole (wire worm), 80, 81
beef cysticercosis, 95
bighorn sheep hingworm, 88, 89
brisket worm, 94, 95
brown stomach worm, 80, $1
capillary worm, 86, 87
cattle bankrupt worm, 84
coccidia, 92, 93
crypto, 92, 93
Cysticercus tenuicollis, 96
esophageal worm, 94, 95
gid, 97
goat lungworm, 88, 89
hair worm (black scour worm), 84
hookworm, 84
hydatid cyst, 96
large-mouthed bowel worm, 86, 87
liver fluke, 90, 91
lungworm, 88, 89
Neopspora caninwn, 92, 93
nodular worm, 82, 83

 

rumen fluke, 95
sheep cysticercosis, 97
skin nodular worm, 94, 95
sorehead, 97
tapeworm, 90, 91
tapeworm, fringed, 96
thin-necked intestinal worm, 82, 83
threadworm, 82, 83
trich, 90, 91
trichostrongyle parasites, 85
whipworm, 86, 87
Cattle bankrupt worm, 84, 85
CBC, defined, 224
Cecal worm, 158, 159
Centrifugation, modified double, 5
Cephenemyia sp. 189
Cerearial dermatitis, 154
Cestodes. See also Zoonotic diseases
classification of, 13
in gerbils, 172
in hamsters, 172
in mice, 173
in ratites, 168
in rats, 174
in reptiles, 211
Cetacea, parasites of, 199-205. See also Marine
mammals, parasites of
list of species, 200
Chabertic, spp., 86, 87
Chandlerella quiscali, 168
Cheyletiella spp.
in cats, 43
in dogs, 19, 43
in rabbits, 43, 177
Chickens, parasites of, 155. See also Birds, parasites of
Chigger, larval, 48
ers, 196
Chirodiscoides caviae, 179
Choanotaenia spp., 160, 161
Chorioptes, spp., 106, 107
Classification of parasites, 11-13
Cnemidocoptes mutans, 163
CNS, defined, 224
Coccidia. See Eimeria, spp.s Isospora, spp.
Cochliomyia, hominivorax, 99
Cod worm, 189
Codiostomunt struthionis, 168

 

   

Concentrations, measures of, 223
Contracaecum sp., 201, 204
Conversion tables, 223-224
Cooperia, spp.
in lamas, 117
in ruminants, 84, 85
Corynosoma sp., 203
Cows. See Cattle
Coyote, parasites of 181, 190, 194. See also Wildlife,
parasites of
Crassicauda sp., 204
c

Crocodiles, parasites of. See Reptiles, parasites of

  

aytish, as hosts of giant kidneyworm, 38

Cryptosporidiun, spp.

in dogs, 40

in hamsters, 178

in humans, 214, 215

life cycle, 75

in llamas, 118

oocysts, 76

in ratites, 168, 169

in reptiles, 2 11

in ruminants, 92, 93
Ctenocephalides, spp., 168
Cutaneous larva migrans

in cats, 52

in dogs, 19, 22

in humans, 19

in pigs, 139
Cutaneous leishmaniasis, 19

227

Index

Cuterebra spp., 41

Cyathostomum sp., 126, 127

Cylicocephalus sp., 126, 127

Cylicocyclus sp. 126, 127

Cylicospirura sp., 190

Cyrnea colini, 168

Cysticercosis, 95

Cysts, nerve or muscle (Protozoa-Apicomplexa), 187
Cytanxzoon sp., 47

Damalinia (Bovicola) sp., 119
Davainea spp.. 168
Deer ked, 192
Deer, parasites of, 189, 192. See also Wildlife, parasites
of

mule, 182, 188

white-tailed, 183-185
Deletrocephalus spp.. 168, 169
Demodex canis, 42
Dentostomella spp., 178
Dermacentor, spp.. 132, 193
Dermanyssus gallinae, 164
Diagnosis of parasitic infections, 3-8
Dicheilonema spp. 168
Dictyocaulus, spp.

in horses, 121

in ruminants, 88, 89
Dioctopbyma renale, 38
Dipetalonema reconditum, 26, 28, 29
Diphyllobothriiwn, spp.

in dogs, 37

in humans, 214

in marine mammals, 201

in wildlife, 194
Diplydiwn, spp.

in cats, 50, 58, 59

in dogs, 17, 19, 32, 39

in humans, 214
Dipylidiasis

in cats, 52

in dogs, 19
Dirofilaria immnitis

in cats, 52

comparison of microfilariae with Dipetalonema

reconditum, 26

diagnosis of, 4

in dogs, 19, 24, 25

treatment protocol for, 27

in wildlife, 190
Dirofilariasis

in cats, 52

in dogs, 19
Index

Diseases associated with parasites. See Zoonotic
diseases
Displar
in birds, 165
Dogs

 

anthelmintics for, 20
zoonotic diseases of, 19
Dogs, parasites of, 17-45

body, location on, 18

external, 39-45
biting louse, 39, 48
brown dog tick, 44
ear mite, 43
flea, 40
follicular mange mite, 42
fur, or surface, mite, 19, 43
mange mite, 19
Neospora caninum, 45
Rhipicephalus sanguinens, 44
rodent botfly, 41
sucking louse, 39
ticks, 44

internal, 21-38
Alaria canis, 17
Ancylostoma caninum, 17
anthelmintics for, 20
ascarid (roundworm). See ‘Toxocara, spp.5

Toxascaris leonina

Capillaria aerophila, \7
coccidia, 34, 35
deer or moose tapeworm, 33, 36, 37
Dipetalonema reconditum, 26, 28, 29
Dipylidim caninum, 17, 19, 32, 39
esophageal worm, 38
eyeworm, 38
fecal eggs and oocysts, 17
flea tapeworm, 19, 32, 39
fox lungworm, 37
Giardia canis, 34
guinea (or dragon) worm, 37
heartworm, 19, 24, 25
hookworm, northern, 24, 25
hookworm, southern, 19, 22, 23
intestinal fluke, 30, 31
Isospora canis, 17
Isospora obioensis, 17
lung fluke, 30, 31
Mesocestoides sp., 17
Nanopbyetus salmincola, 17
Phyaloptera praeputialis, 17
salmon poisoning fluke, 17, 30, 31
Sarcocystis spp., 34, 35
stomach worm, 28, 29
Taenia sp.. 17

228

tapeworm, 32, 33, 36,37
threadworm, 19, 24, 25
Toxascaris leonina, 17
Toxocara canis, 17
tracheal worm, 28, 29
‘Trichuris vulpis, \7
Uncinaria stenocephala, \7
whipworm, 22, 23
protozoan parasites, 47
Dracunculus spp., 37
Dromuaestrongylus, 168
Drugs for external parasite control
on humans, 215
on pigs, 141
on ruminants, 79
Drugs for internal parasite control. See Anthelmintics
Ducks, parasites of, 155, 18 1. See also Birds, parasites
of; Wildlife, parasites of

Ear mites, 43
Echinococeosis, 52
Echinococcus, spp. See also Taenia, spp.
in dogs, 19, 32, 33
in dogs and cats, 49
in humans, 214
hydatid cyst, 49
in ruminants, 96
Eimeria, spp-
in birds, 153, 155, 160, 161
in cattle, 69
in hedgehogs, 176

in horses, 121

in llamas, 115, 118

in pigs, 137, 146

in ratites, 168

in reptiles, 211

in ruminants, 92, 93

in ruminants, life cycle, 74

in sheep and goats, 71, 72
Elaeophora, spp.

in ruminants, 97

in wildlife, 188
Hlapbostrongylus spp., 191
“LISA, defined, 224
Elk, parasites of, 182, 192, 195. See also Wildlife,
parasites of

 

Emus, parasites of. See Ratites, parasites of
Enterobius sp., in humans, 214, 215
Entomoeba, spp.

in dogs, 19

in reptiles, 212
Esophageal worm

in dogs, 38
in ruminants, 94
Ether-formalin sedimentation technique, 6
Eurytrema sp. 196
Eyeworm, 38, 196

Fainalges, 165
Fasciola hepatica, detection of, 6
Fasciola, spp.
in humans, 215
in ruminants, 90, 91
Fascioloides magna, 186
Fecal eggs and oocysts, relative sizes
in birds, 153
in cats, 50
in dogs, 17
in horses, 121
in llamas, 115
in pigs, 137
Fecal samples
collection of, 3
flotation of, 4
Fecal sedimentation technique, 6
Feces, artifacts in, 219-221
Felicola substratus, 39, 48
Filarivides, 28, 29
Fish, as hosts of giant kidneyworm, 38
Fish, parasites of, 182. See also Wildlife, parasites of
13

 

Flatworms, classification of, 12
Fleas
in cats and dogs, 40
in guinea pigs, 175
in hedgehogs, 176
key to, 41
list of specie

 

in mice, 173

in pigs, 150

in ratives, 168
Flea tapeworm

in cats, 50, 58, 59

in dogs, 19, 32, 39
Flies

on pigs, 150

on ratites, 168

 

on ruminants, 98, 99-101
Flotation of fecal sample, common solutions, 5
Flukes. See also Trematodes

flukes, duck, 155, 215

flukes, intestinal, 30, 31

flukes, liver

 

in ruminants, 90, 95

in wildlife, 186
flukes, hing, See Paragonimus spp.
flukes, rumen, 95

229

Index

Follicular mange mites, 42
Fos, parasites of, 181, 194. See also Wildlife, parasites
of
lungworm, 37
Fur mites, 43

Gabucinia spp., 168
Gapeworm, 153, 160, 161
Gastropbilus spp., 123, 128, 129
Geese, parasites of, 155. See also Birds, parasites of
Gerbils, list of parasite species, 172
Giant kidneyworm, 38
Giardia, spp. 215
in birds, 153, 165
in cats, 61
in dogs, 34
in humans, 214, 215
isolation of, 3,7
in mice, 179
in ratites, 168
Gid tapeworm
in dogs, 36
in ruminants, 97
Gliricola sp., 178
Gnathostoma sp., 49
Goats
anthelmintics for, 78, 79
zoonotic diseases of, 74

 

oats, parasites of. See Sheep, parasites of
Gongylonema spp.

in pigs, 147

in ruminants, 94
Goniveates spp.. 163
Gordius sp., in feces, 221
Guinea (or dragon) worm, 37
Guinea pigs, list of parasite species, 175
Gullet (esophageal) worm, 147
Gyalocephalus, 126, 127

Habronema, spp.

in horses, 121, 128, 129

in ratites, 168
Haemabartonella spp.. 47
Haematopinus, spp.

in pigs, 149

in ruminants, 102
Haemonchus, spp-

in Hamas, 117

in ruminants, 80, 81

in sheep and goats, 71
Haemophysalis spp., 168
Haemoproteus sp., 153, 165
Index

Hair worm (black scour worm), 84, 85
Hamsters, list of parasite species, 172
Heartworms
diagnostic/treatment protocol, 27
in dogs, 19, 24-27
interpretation of test results, 26
in wild canids, 190
Hedgchogs, list of parasite species, 175-176
Hematocrit method, for detecting microfilariae, 7
Hepatozoon canis, 47
Heterakis gallinarum, 158, 159
Ilistomonas, spp.
in birds, 159
in ratites, 168
Hookworm, 54
in cats, 55
in dogs, 19, 22-25
in reptiles, 209
in ruminants, 84, 85
Horsehair worm, in feces, 221
Horses, parasites of, 121-133
external, 132-133
internal, 126-131
ascarid (roundworm), 128, 129
Babesia sp., 130, 131
bor fly, 128, 129
fecal eggs and oocysts, 121
pinworm, 126, 127
stomach worm, 128, 129
strongyle, large, 126, 127
strongyle, small, 126
tapeworm, 130, 131
threadworm, 130, 131
location on host body, 122
Houttnynia, sp. 167, 168
Human parasites, 213-216
external, 216
internal, 214-215
location on body, 213
Hydatid cyst disease
in dogs, 19
in ruminants, 96
Hyostrongylus rubidis, 146
Ilypoderma lineatum, 99

IM, defined, 224
Insecta, classification of, 13
Intestinal fluke, 30, 31
Intestinal worm, thin-necked, 118
Isolation techniques of parasites, 6,7
Isospora, spp.

in birds, 153

in cats, 50, 61

230

in dogs, 34, 35
in pigs, 137, 144, 145
in ratites, 168

IV, defined, 224

Kalicephalus sp., 209
Kapsultaenia sp., 209
Knott's test to detect microfilariae, 7

Laboratory animals, parasites of, 171-179
Lagocheilascariasis, in cats, 52
Lagocheilascaris minor, 52
Large-mouthed bowel worm, 86, 87
Larvae, dorsal-spined, comparison of lengths, 185
Leishmania donovani, 19
Leucocytozoon, spp.

in birds, 162

diagnosis of, 4

in ratites, 168
Libyostrongylus spp., 168
Lice

‘on cats, 39, 48

on dogs, 39

on guinea pigs, 175

‘on horses, 123

on llamas, 119

on marine mammals, 204

‘on mice, 173

on pigs, 149, 150

on ratites, 168

onrats, 174

‘on ruminants, 102, 103

on wildlife, 192
Linognathus, spp.

on dogs, 39

on ruminants, 102, 103

on wildlife, 192
Lipoptena sp., 192
Listropborus sp.. 177
Lizards, parasites of. See Reptiles, parasites of
Llamas, anthelmintics for, 116
Llamas, parasites of, 1 15-120

external, 119-120

fecal eggs and oocysts, 115

internal, 117-118

location on host body, 116
Lung fluke. See Paragonimus, spp.
Lungworm

in bighorn sheep, 88, 89

in cats, 50, 56, 57

in cattle, 88

in dogs, 37
in goats, 88, 89
in marine mammals, 202, 205
in pigs, 137, 144
in ruminants, 88, 89
Lymnaea spp. as hosts of liver flukes, 197

Macracanthorbynebus, spp-
classification of, 12
in pigs, 137, 138, 147
Mange mites
in cats, 62
in dogs, 42
Marine mammals, parasites of, 123, 189, 199-206
Acanthocephala, 201
cestodes, 201
flukes, 201
hookworm, 205
lungworm, 205
nematodes, 201, 204, 205
tapeworm, 201
trematodes, 201, 205
Marten stomach worm, 192. See also Giant kidney
worm
McMaster technique, modified, 6
Melophagus ovinus, 108
Menacanthus spp., 163
Meningeal worm
in llamas, 120
in wildlife, 184, 185
Menopon spp., 163
Mesocestoides sp., 190
Metastrongylus sp., 137, 144, 145
Metric/English conversion factors, 223
Mice, list of parasite species, 172
Microflariae. See also Heartworms
diagnosis of, 4
Microscope, calibration of, 8
Mink, parasites of, 182. See also Wildlife, parasites of
Mirothoracius sp., 119
Mites
on bears, 193
on cats, 43, 62
detection technique, 7
on dogs, 42, 43
‘on gerbils, 172
‘on guinea pigs, 175
‘on hamsters, 172
on hedgehogs, 176
on Ilamas, 119
on marine mammals, 204
‘on mice, 173, 174
‘on muskrats, 196
on pigs, 150

231

Index

on rabbits, 43, 172
on ratites, 168
on rats, 175
on ruminants, 105-108
on wild canids, 194
on wildlife, 187
Mites, in feces, 220, 221
Modified double centrifugation, 5
Modified MeMaster technique, 6
Moniezia, spp.
in ruminants, 90, 91
in sheep and goats, 71, 90
Monoecocestus sp., 191
Moose, parasites of, 182. See also Wildlife, parasites of
tapeworm, 36
Mountain goat, parasites of, 182. See also Wildlife,
parasites of
Muellerius capillaris, 88, 89
Musca, spp., 100
Muskrat, parasites of, 182. See also Wildlife, parasites
of
mites, 195
Myiasis, 123
Myocoptes musculinus, 177

Nanopbyetus selmincola, 30, 31, 49
Nasitrema sp.. 205
Necator sp., 214
Nemathelminthes, classification of, 11
Nematodes. See also Zoonotic diseases

classification of, 11-12

in gerbils, 172

in guinea pigs, 175

in hamsters, 172

in hedgehogs, 175-176

in marine mammals, 201, 204, 205

in mice, 173

in rabbits, 172

in ratites, 168

in rats, 174

in reptiles, 209, 210, 211
Nematodirella sp., 197
Nematodirus, spp.

in llamas, 118

in ruminants, 82, 83

in sheep and goats, 71
Neorickettsia helmintheca, 30
Neospora, spp.

in dogs, 45

in ruminants, 76
Nodular worm, 82, 83
Notoedres cati, 62
Index

Ocetosoma sp., 209
Oesophagostonuun, spp.

in llamas, 117

in pigs, 137, 142, 143

in ruminants, 82, 83
Oestrus ovis, 100
Onchocerca, spp 94, 189
sus spp., 176
Oochoristica sp., 210
Opbidascaris sp., 209
Opposum, parasites of, 182. See also Wildlife, parasites

of

Ornithonyssus sp., 48
Orthobalaraclme sp., 204
Osteragia, spp.

in Hamas, 117

in ruminants, 80, 81

in sheep and goats, 71

Onothou

 

Ostriches, parasites of. See Ratites, parasites of
Oswalderuzia sp., 210
Otobins megnini, 168
Otodectes cynotis
in dogs, 43
in ferrets, 179
in hedgehogs, 176
Otostrongylus sp., 202, 205
Oxyuris equi, 121, 126, 127

Paragonimiasis, 52
Paragoninms, spp.

in cats, 56, 57

in dogs, 30, 31

in humans, 215
Paralges sp. 168
Paramphistomum sp., 9S
Paranoplocepbala mamillana, 121
Parascaris equorum, 121, 128, 129
Parasitic infections, diagnosis of, 3-8
Parelapbostrongylus tenuis

in llamas, 120

in wildlife, 184, 185
Paronchocerca struthionus, 168
Passalurus ambiguons

in rabbits, 176

in wildlife, 196
Pediculosis, transient, 154
Pediculus hominis, 215, 216
Percent, as a measure of concentration, 223
Pharyngodon sp., 209, 210
Pheasants, parasites of. See Birds, parasites of
Philophthalmus gralli, 168
Phocanema, 201
Physaloptera, spp., 28, 29, 210

232

Pigeons, parasites of . See Birds, parasites of
Pigs
anthelmintics for, 140
drugs for external parasites, 141
Pigs, parasites of, 137-150
body, location on, 138
external, 149-150
fecal eggs and oocysts, 137, 147
internal, 142-148
ascarid (roundworm), 142, 143
coccidia, 144, 145, 146
gullet (esophageal) worm, 147
lungworm, 137, 144, 145
nodular worm, 142, 143
spiny-headed worm (thorny-headed worm), 137,
147
stomach worm, 146
swine kidney worm, 147
tapeworm, pork, 148
threadworm, 144, 145
trichina worm, 139, 148
whipworm, 142, 143
Pinnipedia, parasites of, 200. See also Marine
mammals, parasites of
Pinworm
in humans, 214
in reptiles, 209, 210
in wildlife, 191, 196
Plant material in feces, 219-221
Plasmodium, spp.
in birds, 153
in ratites, 168
Platyhelminthes, classification of, 12-13
Pneumocystis carinii, 19
Pnenmonyssus caninum, 48
PO, defined, 224
Pollen, in feces, 219
Polyplax serrata, 177
Porcupine, parasites of, 183, 191. See also Wildlife,
parasites of
Porpoises, parasites of, 200. See also Marine mammals,
parasites of
ppm, defined, 223, 224
Preservation of parasites, 4
Pricetrema zalophi, 203
Protalges sp. 165
Protostrongylus, spp., 186
in bighorn sheep, 88, 89
in wildlife, 196
Protozoan parasites. See also Zoonotic diseases
classification of, 11
diagnosis of, in blood, 4
in dogs and cats, 47, 52
in gerbils, 172
in guinea pigs, 175

in hamsters, 172

in mice, 173

in ratites, 168

in rats, 174

in reptiles, 211
Prouterina wescotti, 195
Psorer gates, spp.

in mice, 178

in ruminants, 108
Psoroptes, spp.

in rabbits, 177

in ruminants, 106, 107

in wildlife, 187
Prerolichidae spp., 168
Pthirus pubis, 215, 216

Q defined, 224

Rabbits, parasites of, 183. See also Wildlife, parasites
of
Cheyletiella parasitavorax, 43
Eimeria, spp., 171
list of parasite species, 172
mites, 43
Raccoon, parasites of, 183, 188, 195. See also Wildlife,
parasites of
Raillietina spp., 160, 161
Ratites, parasites of, 167-169
Rats, list of parasite species, 174-175
Reptiles
anthelmintics for, 21 1
Reptiles, parasites of, 183, 207-212. See also Wildlife,
parasites of

 

fecal eggs and oocysts, 209-211
list of parasite species, 208
Rhipicephalus sp.
in dogs, 44
in ratives, 168
Rickettsial disease (salmon poisoning), 30
Rodent bot tly, 41
Rodents, parasites of, 41, 183. See also Laboratory
animals, parasites of Wildlife, parasites of

 

Roundworms. See Ascarid (roundworm)
classification of, 11-12
Ruminants, parasites of. See Cattle, parasites of Cattle,

sheep, and goats, parasites of; Sheep, parasites of

Salmon poisoning fluke, 30, 31, 49
Sarcocystis, spp.
in birds, 165

233

Index

in cats, 60
in dogs, 34, 35
life cycle, 71
in wildlife, 187

Sarcomastigophora (Protozoa), classification of, 11

Sarcoptes scabiei
in dogs, 19
in guinea pigs, 178
in humans, 215, 216
in llamas, 119
in pigs, 149
in ruminants, 106, 107
in wildlife, 194

Sarcosporidiosis, 139

SC, defined, 224

Schistosoma sp. 215

Screwworm, 99

SD, defined, 224

Sea lions, parasites of, 200. See also Marine mammals,

parasites of

Seals, parasites of, 200. See also Marine mammals,

parasites of

Sedimentation techniques, 6

Seeds, in Feces, 219, 221

Setaria cervi, 9S

Sheep
anthelmintics for, 78, 79
zoonotic diseases of, 74

Sheep, parasites of. See also Cattle, sheep, and goats,

parasites of
body, location on, 73
coccidia, compared with those in goats, 73
fecal eggs and oocysts, 71
ked (sheep tick), 108
tapeworm, 36

Simulium, 168

Sipbona (Haematobia) irritans, 101

Skin scraping technique
for detection of mites, 4, 7

Skin worm
in ruminants, 94

189

Skunk, striped, parasites of, 182

in wildlife,

 

See also Wildlife,
parasites of

Smear, direct, for parasite detection, 7
Snakes, parasites of. See Reptiles, parasites of
Sobolipbyme baturini, 192
Solenoptes, spp., 102
Solutions, flotation, in parasite detection, 5
Sorehead, 97
Sparganosis, 52
Spiny-headed worm (thorny-headed worm)

in marine mammals, 201, 203

in pigs, 147
Index

Spirocerca lupi, 38, 49
Spirometra sp., 58, 59
Stephanofilaria spp., 94
Stephanurus dentatus, 147
Stomach worm

in dogs, 28

in pigs, 146

in ruminants, 80, $1, 84, 85

in wildlife, 190
Stomoxys calcitrans, 101
Strongyloides, spp., 209

in dogs, 19, 24, 25

in horses, 121, 130, 131

in humans, 214

in llamas, 117

in pigs, 137, 144, 145

in ruminants, 82, 83, 85

in sheep and goats, 71
Strongyloidiasis, 19
Strongylus vulgaris, 126, 127
Struthiofilaria me galocephala, 168
Struthiolipeurus spp., 168
Swine kidney worm, 147
Syngamus trachea

in birds, 153, 160, 161

in ratites, 168
Synthesiwn sp., 203

Tabanus spp., 101
Tables, conversion, 223-224
Tachygonetria sp., 210
osis, 139
Taenia, spp. See also Echinococcus, spp.
in cats, 50, 58, 59
in dogs, 32, 33, 36, 37
in humans, 214
life cycle of T: saginata, 71
in pigs, 148
in ruminants, 95, 96, 97
Tapeworm
in birds, 160, 161

Tacniasis-cysti

 

in cats, 50, 58, 59. See also ‘lizenia, spp.

classification of, 13

in dogs, 19, 32-33, 36, 37
in humans, 214

in marine mammals, 201
in pigs, 148

in porcupines, 191

in rabbits, 172

in reptiles, 209, 210

in ruminants, 90, 91

in sheep, 36

in wildlife, 190

234

Tapeworm, broad fish, 37
Tapeworm, fringed

in bighorn sheep, 193

in ruminants, 96
Temperature conversion chart, 224
Terranvova, 201
Texas cattle fever, 92
Thelazia, spp.

in dogs, 38

in wildlife, 196
hin-necked intestinal worm, 82, 83
‘Thorny-headed worm, 12
Vhreadworm

in dogs, 19, 24, 25

in pigs, 144, 145

in ruminants, 82, 83
Thrips, in feces, 220
Thysanosoma actinoides, 96
Ticks—key, 104

in dogs, 44

in hedgehogs, 176

in pigs, 150

in ratites, 168

in ruminants, 104, 105
seed or larval, 193
Toxascaris leonina

in cats, 50, 54, 55

in dogs, 22, 23
Toxo. See Toxoplasma gondii; Toxoplasma, spp.
‘Toxocara, spp.

in cats, 50, 54, 55

in dogs, 19, 21
Toxoplasma gondii, life cycle, 75
‘Toxoplasma, spp.

in cats, 50, 52, 60

in cats and dogs, 47

in pigs, 139

in ratites, 168, 169

in wildlife, 194
Toxoplasmosis

in birds, 154

in cats, 52

in pigs, 139
Tracheal worm, 22, 23, 28, 29
Transient pediculosis, 123
Trematodes. See also Zoonotic diseases

classification of, 12-13

in dogs, 30-31

eggs, detection of, 6

in marine mammals, 201, 203, 205

in rabbits, 172

in ratites, 168

in reptiles, 209, 211
Trich. See Tritrichomonas, spp.
Trichinella spiralis (Trichina worm)

in pigs, 139, 148

in wildlife, 188
Trichinosis, 139
Trichobilharzia spp., 155
Trichodectes canis

in dogs, 39

in dogs and cats, 48
Trichomonas, spp.

in birds, 153, 162

in dogs and cats, 49

in ratites, 168
Trichostrongylus, spp.

in Hamas, 117

in ruminants, 80, 81, 84, 85

in sheep and goats, 71
Trichuris, spp.

in dogs, 22, 23

in humans, 214, 215

in llamas, 117

in pigs, 137, 142, 143

in ruminants, 86, 87

in sheep and goats, 71
Tritrichomonas, spp. 49, 90, 91
Trixacarus caviae, 175, 178
Trombicula sp., 196
Trypanosoma, spp.

in cats and dogs, 47

in dogs, 19

in mice, 178
Trypanosomiasis

in cats, 52

in dogs, 19

in pigs, B9
Turkeys, parasites of, 155. See also Birds, parasites of
Turtles, parasites of. See Reptiles, parasites of

Uncinaria sp., 205
Uncinaria stenocephala, 24, 25
Ursicoptes americanus, 193

Visceral larva migrans

in cats, 52

in dogs, 19

in humans, 19
Visceral leishmaniasis, 19

Walruses, parasites of, 200. See also Marine mammals,
parasites of

235

Index

Wellcomia evaginata, 191
Whales, parasites of, 200. See also Marine mammals,
parasites of
Whipworm. See Trichuris, spp.
Wildlife, parasites of, 181-197. See also Birds,
parasites of; Deer, parasites of; Wolves parasites of
arterial worm, 188
ascarid (roundworm), 188
bear brain parasite, 195
chiggers, 196
cod worm, 189
cysts, nerve or muscle (Protozoa-Apicomplexa) in,
187
deer ked, 192
deer throat bot, 189
eyeworm, 196
fluke, liver, 186
heartworms, 190
lice, sucking, 192
list of species, 181-183
lungworm, 196
marten stomach worm, 192
meningeal worm, 184, 185
mites, 187, 193, 194
pinworm, 191, 196
skin worm, 189
stomach worm, 190
tapeworm, 190, 191
tapeworm, broad fish, 194
tapeworm, fringed, 193
ticks, seed or larval, 193
toxo, 194
Wire worm, 80
in ruminants, 81
Wolves, parasites of, 190, 194. See also Wildlife,
parasites of
Wyominia tetoni, 193

Yeast, in feces, 220

Zalophotrema hepaticum, 203
Zoonotic diseases
associated with birds, 154
associated with cats, 52
associated with cattle, 70
associated with dogs, 19
associated with horses, 123
associated with sheep and goats, 74
associated with humans, 214
    
    
    
 
 

 
 

Veterinary Parasitology Reference Manual is a practical, thorough, bench
top reference for basic diagnostic veterinary parasitology. The manual provides pertinent
information on parasite life cycles, importance, location in the host, zoonotic potential,
current literature, diagnosis, and treatment. It also includes step-by-step instructions for
the most common diagnostic procedures used in routine Nocoulie tas elas loon

      

  
   
     
    
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

Sections are organized by animal host species, including dogs; cats; cattle, sheep, and
goats; llamas; horses; pigs; birds; ratites (ostriches, emus, and cassowaries); and labora-
ROSE TTT RETR RCT CI CBS Ne) COREL Tana mammals, and humans. There is a sec-
tion in which common artifacts found in fecal samples are presented, and the last section
includes conversion tables and a list of abbreviations.

Features of the Fifth Edition include:

© Updated and enhanced references

Cee iiorenet ston mormon

CMe iy conic Mose Menem Tet cme metre namic ttn ely

¢ Sections on parasites of laboratory animals and humans
© Over 500 photographs and figures

 

Readers will find this to be an easily accessible and accurate resource for information
about parasites in a variety of animals—wild, domestic, common, and exotic.

William J. Foreyt is a professor in the Department of Microbiology and Pathology in
the College of Veterinary Medicine at Washington State University, Pullman. Dr. Foreyt
Recor ccm meccsTie Var TCC Rg Cel Hee Tesco eles As corona Col ON ATaNe BTEC CO Tie MeL
interactions among domestic livestock, wildlife, and humans.

() ISBN O-8138-2419-2

Blackwell 9 MMI

Publishing

 

     
