Toxocara canis

©. -

 
Veterinary Parasitology

 

Reference Manual
Fifth Edition
Veterinary Parasitology

 

Reference Manual
Fifth Edition

William J. Foreyt

¢ Blackwell
0 Publishing
William J. Forest. Ph.D., #8 2 professor ist the Callege of
Verernary M yo at Washington Srte University and teaches
i j gnostic para-

     

  

seter
sttole

  

ary pracasi a »
His major ccvearch interests tee Parte and infectious
fac with an e nphasis on dis-

 

disctses of wild and domestic amis J
eas, interaction between wild and deanestic animals.

 

4) 199, 1994, 1990, 1YSY William J. Foreye
€) 2001 Jowa State University Press
Al rights reserved

 

Whackwell Publishing Professional
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Jowa SOOL4

 

Orders: 1-800-862-6657
Office: 1-515-292-0140
Fax: 1-515-292-3348

Web site: wiew black wellprofessional,com

ination to photocopy items for internal or personal use,
ents, is granted by

Author
or the internal or personal use of speci
Mackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee of $.10 per copy
is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations
that have been granted a phatocopy license hy CCC, a separate

 

 

 

system of payments has heen arranged, The fee code for users of
s 0-8 138-24 19-2/2001 $.10.

 

the Transactional Reporting Servic
Printed on acid-free paper ini the United States of America

First edition, 1989 © William J. Foreyt
Second edition, 1990 © William J. Foreyt
Third edition, 1994 © William J. For
Fourth edition, 1997 © William J. Foreyt

Fifth edition, 2001 © lowa State University Press

 

 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Foreyt, William J.

Veterinary parasitology reference manual / William J. Foreyt.
— Sth ed,

p. cm,

includes hibliographical references and index,

ISBN 0-8138-2419-2 (alk. paper)

1. Veterinary parasitology—Handhooks, manuals, ete,

(IDNLM: f. Parasitic Diseases, Animal—Handbooks, 2,
Parasites—t tandbooks,| 1, Title.
SYS10,A3 £67 2001
636,089'696—de? 1

 

2001004464

Use last digit is the print number: 98 7 6 5

Disclaimer

 
  
  

‘The nature of drug informal
evolving because of ongoing research ii
experience. While care has been taka
the accuracy of the information presented érvors
may have been missed. Readers are advised th
decisions regarding drug use must be based on.
the independent judgment of the clinician, new
information about the drug, and changing med-
ical practices. Package inserts and tabels for cach
drug product should be read carefully for
dosage, route of administration, and withdrawal
period. The author and publisher cannat be held
responsible for any damage resulting from re-

 

 

liane on any information contained herein,
whether with respect to drug identification, uses,
procedures, dosages, or equivalencies, or by rea-
son of any misstatement or eros, negligent or
otherwise, contained in this work.
CONTENTS

Preface
Introduction

Section 1, Diagnostic Parasitology

Collection and Submission of Sanyples
Diagnostic Techniques

Microscopy

Bibliography

Section 2. General Parasitology

Classification Simplified
Biblography

Section 3. Parasites of Dogs

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts
Location of Major Parasites
Zoonotic Diseases

Drugs

Internal Parasites

External! Parasites
Biblography

Section 4. Parasites of Cats

Miscellaneous Parasites

Miscellaneous External Parasites
of Cats and Dogs

Feeal Eggs and Oocysts

Location of Major Parasites

Zoonotic Diseases

Drugs

Internal Parasites

External Parasites

Bibliography

Section 5. Parasites of Cattle, Sheep,
and Goats

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts in Cattle
Coccidia in Cattle
Location of Major Parasites in Cattle
Zoonotic Diseases in Cattle
Fecal Eggs and Oocysts in

Sheep and Goats

vii
viii

we

wow

69

69
69

70

71

Coccidia in Sheep and Goats

Location of Major Parasites in
Sheep and Goats

Zoonotic Diseases in Sheep and
Goats

Drugs Used in Ruminants

Internal Parasites

External Parasites

Bibliography

 

Section 6, Parasites of Llamas

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts
Coceidia in Lamas
Location of Major Parasites
Drugs

Internal Parasites

ternal Parasites
Bibliography

 
 

Section 7, Parasites of Horses

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts
Location of Major Parasites
Zoonotic Diseases

Drugs

Internal Parasites

External Parasites
Bibliography

Section 8. Parasites of Pigs

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts
Location of Major Parasites
Zoonotic Diseases

Drugs

Internal Parasites

External Parasites
Bibliography

Section 9, Parasites of Birds

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts
Location of Major Parasites
Zoonotic Diseases

Coecidia in Birds

Drugs

Internal Parasites

“I
Re]

77
80
98
109

Hs
Hs
16
Il6
MAF
io
120

Io te le ee
FES

 

137

aF
138

39
I4u
142
149
150
External Parasites
Bibliography

Section 10. Parasites of Ratites
(Ostriches, Emus, and Cassowaries)

Location of Major Parasites
Drugs

Comunon Parasites
Bibliography

Section 11. Parasites of Laboratory
Animals

Drugs
Common Parasites
Bibliography

Section 12. Parasites of Wildlife

Important Parasites of Wildlife
Parasites
Bibliography

Section 13. Parasites of Marine Mammals

Marine Mammals
Major Parasites
Drugs

Internal Parasites
Bibliography

163
166

167

167
167
168
170

171

171
171
179

181

181
184
197

199

199
200
201
201
206

vi

Section 14. Parasites of Reptiles

Common Reptiles
Major Parasites

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts
Drugs

Internal Parasites
Bibliography

  

Section 15. Parasites of Humans

Location of Major Parasites
Common Parasites

Internal Parasites

External Parasites
Bibliography

Section 16. Common Artifacts in Feces
Artifacts
Spurious Parasites

Section 17. Tables

Metric / English conversion factors
and measures of concentration

Temperature, length, and volume
conversion chart

Abbreviations Used in Text

Index

 

219 '

219
220

223

223

224
224

225
PREFACE

In this revised fifth edition, many references
and figures have been updated and improved,
newer drugs have been included, the section on
parasites of marine mammals has been improved,
and sections on laboratory animal parasites and
human parasites have been added.

This book evolved as a response to the needs
of veterinarians, veterinary students, and techni-
cians and provides access to pragmatic reference
information in veterinary parasitology. | arranged
the book by host species, dogs, cats, ruminants,
horses, pigs, avian, reptiles, wildlife, marine mam-
mals, laboratory animals, and humans to allow
easy access to information on parasite life cycles,
importance, location in host, zoonotic potential,
pertinent literature, diagnosis, and treatment. |
have simplified the taxonomy of parasites for vet-
erinary use by modifying the most easily under-
stood taxonomic systems. Photographs of the im-
portant diagnostic stages are included to assist in
the diagnosis of parasitic disease. While this book
is not a complete parasitology reference encyclo-
pedia, it meets the challenge of providing a com-
posite reference in everyday, routine veterinary
parasitology.

Many people have assisted with this publica-
tion and my thanks are extended to them. I espe-
cially thank the late Dr. Richard Wescott, Dr.
Charles Leathers, Richard Dixon, Kris Foreyt, Dr.
Lora Rickard, Dr. Ann Lichtenwalner, Dr. Bill
Pedersen, Dr. Allan Pessier, Dan Rice, John

vu

Lagerguist, Dr. Mark Winning, Ann Foreyt, the
Biomedical Communications Unit at Washington
State University, Amy Wood, Dr, Murray Dailey,
and Susan Barnard, who contributed to several
important aspects of the hook.

The Washington Department of Fish and
Wildlife, Oregon Department of Fish and
Wildlife, and the Idaho Department of Game
have cooperated with me in my research projects
and supplied me with thousands of wildlife sam-
ples over the years. | thank them for their enthn-
siastic support. Richard Dixon and Kristine
Foreyt drew a majority of the illustrations, which
significantly enhance the usefulness of this publi-
cation. Their artwork is greatly appreciated. Dr,
Lora Rickard contributed significantly to the sce-
tion on parasites of llamas. Dr. Murray Dailey
contributed significantly to the se
mammals. Susan Barnard of the Adanta Zoo con-
tributed significantly to the section on reptiles.

tion on marine

 

Financial support for the first edition of this pub-
lication in 1984 from The Merek Company
Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.

This book is dedicated to my five exciting
kids, Ann, Russell, Jane, Emily, and Kara, who
are allowing me to live my second childhood
through their interest in small wiggling creatures.
It is equally dedicated to veterinary students to
develop their biological interests and skills in the
fascinating arenas of veterinary parasitology and
field biology. | hope this book is useful to you.

Bill Foreyt
INTRODUCTION

Parasites are a fascinating group of inverte-
brates that are found in and on all groups of ani-
mals of interest in veterinary medicine. ‘They have
evolved and developed with many of their hosts and
may or may not produce clinical disease, depending
ona variety of environmental, ecological, immuno-
logical, physiological, and managerial factors that
influence the host parasite relationship. This rela-
tionship is constantly changing, and as producers
change management systems through animal breed-
ing, animal manipulation, exotic introductions, en-
vironmental control, and use of drugs, different
manifestations of disease are observed. As an exam-
ple, Fascioloides magna is a liver fluke of white-
tailed deer and elk and usually does not harm these
hosts. However, when domestic sheep or goats are
grazed in areas where E magna is present, death of
sheep and goats occurs within a relatively short
time. Some hosts cannot tolerate the effects of spe
cific parasites and die, whereas other hosts are well
adapted to the parasite and no clinical signs of dis-
ease are present.

Examples of some of the ways parasites affect
hosts ar

 

1. The worry and seare factor. Adult bot flies
do not harm direetly, but terrify animals.

2. britation. Lice cause intense irritation and
self-mutilation.

3. Transmission of diseases. Biting flies and
ticks transmit a variety of diseases.

4. Ingestion of blood and lymph. An abo-

masal nematode, Haemonebus contortus,

Vil

causes severe anemia.

 

Sceretion of toxins. Bot fly lary.

, ae secrete
toxins and may cause death.

6. Mechanical blockage, Massive ascarid in-
fections may occlude the intestine.
7, ‘Vissue damage. Kidney worms in dogs

destroy entire kidneys.

 

Production of traumatic lesions. Larvae
of Habronema sp. produce “summer
sores” in horses.

Psychosomatic disease. Animals are rest-
less when external parasites are prevalent.
10. Disruption of metabolic function. Type II
Ostertagia ostertagia increases abomasal
pH.

Competition for nutrients. Many para-
sites cause reduced weight gains and feed
utilization.

11.

12. Zoonotic infections. Certain parasites

transfer from animals to humans.

Since many parasites can be pathogenic, the
goal of the clinician and producer is prevention of
clinical parasitism through management, nutri-
tion, epizootiology, and effective drugs.

 

Knowledge of life cycles and epizootiology must
be used in the formulation of effective parasite
control programs. Indiscriminate use of drugs is a
poor substitute for suboptimal management.

A final word is that new parasites and ecolog-
ical relationships are being discovered, so do not
be surprised when you make a discovery contrary
to published reports.
Veterinary Parasitology

 

 

Reference Manual
Fifth Edition
Section 1

DIAGNOSTIC
PARASITOLOGY

Collection and Submission of Samples

Diagnosis of parasitic infections depends on several
factors, such as collection of the sample, transport of the
sample to the laboratory, anc method of laboratory
evaluation. Diagnostic stages of most parasites can be
detected in feces, blood, sputum, or skin scrapings.
However, infections of immature parasites and latent
and aceult infections present a diagnostic chaflenge.
Important factors to be considered in the diagnosis of
parasitism and the interpretation of results are:

1. Age of the host,

2. Previous exposure to parasites (resistance),

3. Time of the year (spring rise),

4. Physiological relationship (pariparturient rise),
5. Geographical location,

6. Previous use of anthelmintics,

7. History of clinical disease, anc

s

Other considerations.

Proper collection and submission of samples to the
laboratory increase the accurate diagnosis of parasitic
infection,

Fecal Samples

Feces mst be fresh for accurate results. As feces

age, a diagnosis is complicated because ma

 

  

y parasite

 

eggs develop and hatch into larvae. Contaminanrs such
s, and other
s and complicate a diagno-

 

as free-living soil nematodes, fly larvae, mit

arthropods afte

 

 

invade fee

 

sis.

At least 10 g of fresh feces should he collected. If
samples are more than two hours old, samples should be
stored at 4°C until examined. Many parasite stages can
be stored at 4*C for at least nvo months with minimal
development, For routine shipment ro the taborarory,
samples can be cooled to 4°C and then packed with ice
or other coolant (hine ice} for shipment via any of the

  

24- ro 48-hour transport services, Fecal samples are hest

 

stored and seat in whirl-pak bags, small plastic sandwich
bags, plastic containers, disposahle laboratory gloves
tured inside ont, or rectal patpation gloves tmed in-
side ont. All samples should be clearly labeled with a
black indelible marker with the number of the animal,

dare, and the person responsible for the sample.

If coolants are not available, samples can be stored
indefinitely in 10% formalin (one part feces, nine parts
10% formalin), but limitations must be noted (Fig. 1).
Approximately $0% of the ruminant strongyle exes
were detected in feces stored in 10% formalin for 200
days. Storage by freezing is very inefficient, and storage
in 70% ethy! alcoho! or 100% methy! alcoho! is unac-
ceptable (Fig. 2).

When Giardia sp. is suspected, feces can be phiced
in polyviny! alcohol fixative at a ratio of one part feces
to two parts polyviny! alcohol or in 5% formalin for fix-
ation and transport. Also, fecal smears on sides can be
stained with Gormori’s trichrome, iron-hematoxylin,
clorzo! black, or Giemsa stains and submitted to the
laboratory in standard slide mailers.

 

+ 10% Formalin
©---0 5% Formalin

; 0-0 2.5% Formalin

—* 100% Mathy! alcohol

so" 70% Ethyt alcohol

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

  
  
  

 

Percentage of eggs recovered

°
14571015 20 30 40 5075100180200

Days preserved

Fig. 1. Effect of formalin and alcobot preservation on
mea recovery of strongyle eggs over time. Vertical lines
indicate 1 SD. From Foreyt WJ.: Recovery of nemarode
eggs and larvae in deer: Evaluation of fecal preservation
methods, f Am Vet Med Assa 189:1065-1067, 1986.
Reprinted i

 

 

 

Percentage of eggs recovered

 

100
Days preserved

Fig. 2. Effect of remperarure on the mean recovery of
strongyle eges from deer feces over time. From Foreyt
WJ: Recovery of nematode eggs and larvae in deer:
valuation of fecal preservation methods. | An Vet Med
Assn 189:1065-1067, 1986. Reprinted with permission.

 

 

 
Section 1

Fecal Flotation

For normal stools, the ustal diagnostic test is the fe-
cal flotation test, This test concentrates eggs and oocysts
present in the feces into a drop of solution for easy iden-
tification and enumeration of parasitic stages. Important
comparative factors in the fecal flotation technique are
the specific gravity of the flotation solution, the viscasi-
ty or type of solution used, and the rate of plasmolysis
caused by the solution. A specific gravity that is too low
will not float many stages, whereas a solution with a spe-

 

fic gravity that is too high will cause plasmolysis, os-
mosis, or rupture of the stages, making diagnosis diffi-
cult (Fig. 3). Also, as the specific gravity is increased,
excessive debris also floats, which decreases the efficien-
cy of the test. Most parasitic stages float efficiently at a
specific gravity of 1.2 to 1.3. My laboratory uses sugar
1.27). Sugar has a distinet ad-
vantage over salt solution in that less plasmolysis and

 

 

solution (specitic gravity

distortion occur in the egys and oocysts. Fecal-flotation
slide preparations from sugar solution can be kept at
4°C for at least 24 hours, and often for several weeks to
These
slides can be used as nextday reference and teaching
slides. Disadvantages of sugar solutions are that sugar
can be messy and sticky, and sugar attracts flies and oth-
er arthropods. When salt solutions are used, egy distor-
tion ustally occurs in a few hours, and the slides have a
tendency to crystallize and dry out very quickly. To in-
ise the shelf life of a fecal-Rotation slide, one cam put

 

months, with a minimum of distortion of eggs.

 

 

 

cre:
fingernail polish or quick-drying glue around the cover-
slip. Freezing the prepared slide is often effective for pre-
serving the material for many months or years. One ad-
ditional advantage of sugar solution is that some
parasite eggs, such as the salmon poisoning fluke,
Nanophyetis salmincola, toat better in sugar than salt
sohitions. In salt solutions, the eggs often do not float
and are often missed during examination.

Blood

 

ic

 

Blood is used for the diagnosis of spe
stages found in the circulatory system. These parasites
generally indude blood protozoa such as Babesia spp,

ific paras

 

Leucocytozoon spp., and immature stages of filarial par-
asites, such as microfilariac of Dirofilaria inunitis.
Whole blood cam be collected in tubes containing anti-
coagtilam, such as ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA),
and sent to the laboratory at 4°C or in a chilled con-
tainer

For most blood parasites, blood smears on standard
microscope slides can be made from fresh blood or

 

 

 

blood with anticoagulant. After air drymy, smears are
routinely stained with Giemsa stain or Wright's stain.
Stained or unstained slides can be sent to the laboratory,

 

 

Too Low

 

Fig. 3. Effect of specific gravity on egg flotation.

Skin Scrapings

When mites are suspected, skin scrapings can be
collected amd forwarded to the laboratory by placing
them in glycerin in a tightly sealed vial for shipment.
Vials should be packed carefully to prevent breakage or
leakage.

Internal Parasites

Most internal parasites can be preserved in 10%
erin for shipment. Specimens should be

 

formalin or gly
phed in leak-proof vials and packed carefully in sturdy
containers to prevent breakage.

External Parasites

Arthropod parasites can be mast effectively storéd
in 70% ethyl alcohol or glycerin for shipment or long-
term preservation. Formalin (10%) will also preservé
arthropods. Leak-proof vials and a sturdy shipping come
tainer are needed for safe transport.

Labeling

All specimens must be clearly labeled with amimal
species, location in host, date of collection, place calle

 

ed and collector's name, address, and telephone number.

 
Diagnostic Parasitology

Diagnostic Techniques

Table 1. Modified double centrifugation technique

 

  

 

1 Mix 1 g of feces in 10-12 ml water in a beaker and stir until feces are in suspension.

2 Pour the mixture through a tea strainer into another beaker. Press the material in the strainer with a spatula
and discard the material in the strainer.

3. Pour the contents into a [5-ml centrifuge tabe and fill co the cop with water.

4. Centrifuge the tubes at 1,500 rpm for 5-10 minutes.

5S. Decane the tube and then fill one half full of Aocation solution. Stir the sediment with a wooden applicator
stick and then fill the tube almost to the cop with Motation solution.

6 Place the tube in the centrifuge and with a dropper add flotation solution co the cube so the solution is about
tevel with the top of the tube. Place a 22-mm? coverslip on cop of the tube and in contact with the sugar so-
tution.

7: Centrifuge at 1,500 rpm for 5-10 minutes. The coverstip will not fall off if the centrifuge has free-swinging
truntons that swing out co the horizoncal position.

8. Remove coverstip by lifting straight upward, and place ona glass slide. All parasite stages tha floated should
be in the drop under the coverslip.

9%. Examine the slide under x 100 (xL0 ocular and «10 objective) or higher magnification and observe all para-

site stages present.

 

Note: The centrifuge must have free-swinging buckets. If he centrifuge has a fixed bucket position, the coverstips will
fall off. Fecal flocations can also be done without centrifugation by allowing samples in step 4 to set for 20 minures and in
step 7 co set for 30 minutes. This method is not as effective as centrifugation, but results are usually reliable.

Table 2, Common flotation solutions for the fecal flotation technique

 

Sugar:

Granulated sugar (sucrose) 454g or 10 pounds
Tap water 355 ml 3550 ml
(specitic gravity = 1.27)

Dissolve sugar in hot tap water directly, or add sugar to bot water over a low heat and stir.
Approximately 2 ml of 37% formaldehyde or phenol crystals can be added to deter growth of mold.

Sodium chlorid

Saturated NaCl or NaCl 400 g
Tap water 1,000 ml
{specific gravity = 1.18-1.2)

 

Magnesium sulfate: MgSO, 400 g

 

ap water 1,000 ml
(specific gravity = |

 

 

Zine sulface: Zine sulfate 371g
‘Tap water 1,000 ml
(specific gravity = 1.18)

Sodiam nitrat Sodium nitrate 400 g

 

1,000 ml

  

 
Section 1

‘Table 3, Ether-formalin sedimentation technique

1. Mix 1g of feces in 1S ml of water, strain the mixture, and pour into a 15-ml centrifuge tube,

2, Centrifuge at 1,000 rpm for 1-2 minutes.

3. Decant supernatant, add fresh water, and centrifuge again for 1-2 minutes.

4, Decant, add 10 ml of 10% formalin, and let stand for 10 minutes.

5, Add 3 mi of ether, apply a stopper, and shake the contents vigorously. Centrifuge the mixture for 2 minutes.
6. Remove the debris on top of the tube with a catton-tipped swab, Decant the rest of the fluid.

7. Collect the sediment with a pipette, place it on a microscope slide, and examine it microscopically for para.

site eggs.

Note: This technique is good for detection of trematode egps.

Fecal sedimentation technique for Fasciola bepatica and some other fluke eggs

 

Mix 5 g feces in 200 ml water in a beaker,

Pour the mixture through a tea strainer and discard the material in the stramer.

After 10 minutes, decant approximately 70% of the supernatant and refill the beaker with fresh water.
Repeat step 3 for three to five times until the supernatant is clear.

Pour off 90% of the supernatant and pour the sediment into a Petri dish,

6. Examine the sediment under a dissecting microscope (x20-x30) or scanning objective (x4) of the microscope
(total magnifications = x40) for large, yellow, operculated eggs of Fasciola hepatica.

 

   

 

Note: A commercial device consisting of two sieves is sold under the trade name Flukefinder and is
available from Visual Differences, 106 North Bear Bluff Road, Preston, 1D 83263 (2e1te.fluskes@mtac.com).

Table §. Baermann technique for hmgworm larvae isolation

 

1. Place warm water (approximately 25°C) into a glass fimnel that has a stopcock or clamp on a rubber hose
on the end of the furmel.

Take 5 g (or more) feces, wrap the feces in two layers of gauze and place the feces in the water in the funnel,
: After 8 hours, withdraw the bottom 10-15 ml of fluid from the fummels into a 15-ml centrifuge tube.
Centrifuge the tube for § minutes at 1,500 rpm.

f With a pipette, withdraw the bottom 2-3 drops from the centrifuge tube and transfer to microscope slide,

 

wees

Add a coverslip and look for larvae under the microscope.

 

Table 6. Modified McMaster technique for parasite eggs

 

This is a dilution method of estimating eggs present in fecal samples.

 

1. Mix 3g feces in 15 ml of water and pour through a tea strainer,
2 Pour strained material into a 15-ml centrifuge tube and centrifuge at 1,500 rpm for 2 minutes.
3. Mix the sediment in 10 ml of flotation solution and pour into a beaker; add additional 32 ml of flotation so-

lution.
With a pipette, transfer suspension to a McMaster coumting chamber and fill both chambers.
‘Transfer the slide to a microscope and count all eggs inside the ruled squares.

 

Multiply the number of eggs in both chambers by 50 for the rotal number of eggs per gram of feces.

Note: This technique is nor very accurate for samples with small numbers of eggs. McMaster Stides are available from
Advanced Equine Products, 5004 228th Ave. SE, Issaquah, WA 98029, 425-391-1169, (wwraadvancedequine.com!
veterinary).

 
Diagnostic Parasitology

‘Yable 7, Direct smear

 

‘This technique is usec primarily for diagnosis of Giardia, It is a very inefficient technique for cliagnosis of other parasite
infections.

1. Mixa fecal sample the size of the head of a match (I-2 mm?) with a drop of water or saline on a microscope
slide.

2. Mix the drop witha circular motion until the specimen is approximately 1x 1 em.

3. Adda coverslip and examine under the microscope.

4. If large particles are present under the coverslip, remove the particles or start with a new sample.

 

 

Table 8, Skin scraping for external parasites

 

This technique is used primarily for the diagnosis of mites.
1 Add several drops of mineral oil or glycerin to the area to be scraped. The area should be at the periphery of
the cutaneous lesion, noc in the center of the lesion.

 

2. Witha scalpel blade, scrape the area to a depth that blood begins to ooze from the wound.

3. Transfer the bloody material that was scraped to a microscope slide.

4, Add additional mineral oi and cover with a coverslip.

5. Examine under low power (40) of the microscope first, and if nothing is seen, increase the magnification.

 

Note: Large amounts of hair or skin can be digested in 10% KOH for 12-24 hours, and the sediment can
be examined for mites either directly after centrifuging, or the sediment can be mixed with the sugar
flotation solution.

Table 9. Evaluation of blood for microfilariae

 

Knott's test:
1. Mix 1 ml of blood with 9 ml of 2% formalin ina 15-ml tube. Mix by inverting the tube several times after
covering the top of the tube with your thumb.
Pa Wait 2-3 minutes and centrifuge the tube for 5 minutes at 1,500 rpm.

 

3. Use a pipette to draw off 1 or 2 drops of sediment from the base of the tube and transfer to a microscope
stide.
4. Adda coverslip and examine at x400.

 

A drop of 0.1% methylene blue added to the drop on the microscope slide can be helpful in making the di-
agnosis.

Hematocrit method:

i; Fill a microhematocrit tube with blood and centrifuge for 1 minute.

2 Wait a few minutes and then examine the buffy coat with a dissecting microscope, Look for live microfilari-
ae.

3. Break the tube at the buffy coat and dab the buffy coat ona microslide. Add coverslip and examine for mi-

crofilariae on low power on the microscope.

Direct blood smear:

 

1, Place | drop of fresh blood or heparinized blood on a microslide and cover with a coverslip.
2 Examine under low power for live microfilariae.
3. To slow the microfilariag, place a drop of 10% formalin ac the edge of the coverslip.

 
   

Section 1

Microscopy

Table 10, Calibration of the microscope

The acchrate measurement of microscopic diagnostic stages of parasites requires the calibration of the microscope
Two scales are necessary: the ocular micrometer in the ocular of the microscope, which is a glass dise bearing an arbitrary
scale of $0 or 100 divisions, and the stage micrometes, which is a commercial slide etched with an absolute seale 1 or 2
mim long, subdivided into units of 0.1 mm and 0.01 mm.

Most microscopic objects are measured in microns (jum) or (Fm). Therefore, these units of measurement

 

are importants

I mm = 1,000 jun
0.1 mm = 100 stm
0.01 mm = 10 gum

Most parasite diagnostic stages are between 10 ttm and 100 jun long.
The number of magnification mined by multiplying the ocular power (nsually x10) by the objective power,
Therefore, a x10 ocular with x4 objective is x40.

 

dete:

  

On the lowest power of the microscope (usually a x4 objective), superimpose the ocular micrometer over the stage mi-
crometer. Line up the left-hand ends of the scales. Find a place on the scales where one fine on each scale coincides direct-
fy over the others amd count the number of ocular units with a known metric mit on the srage micrometer,

    

ample: 58 umits of the ocular micrometer coincides with 0.36 mm on the stage micrometer.

 

One space of the ocular micrometer, therefore, equals 0.36 mm divided by $8 units = 0.0062 mm per ocular unit or 6.2
}tm per ocular anit, When a parasite egy is measured and is 12 ocular units long, multiply the conversion factor (6.2) by
12 ocular units ro obtain the length of the egg (74.4 gun).

Using the same technique, calibrate all objectives on the microscope and record the conversion factors on the micro-

 

 

imitar ro the

  
 

scope. Most microscopes with x10 eyepieces will have conversion factor!
x4 objective 5.0 gon per tmit space
x10 objective = 9.0 gam per unit space
x40 objective 5 tm per tit space
x100 objective = 1.0 tem per unit space

 

   

 

     
 

[stage
Micrometer
Hmm scale

eho

 

 

 

  

   

 

    

Microscepa Ocular

   

g. 4, Example of a stage micrometer and an ocular 1
cromete

   

with che x4 objective and 10 ocular. Not
in the eyepiver. 0.76 mm = 760 jun; J space = 16.9 pm.

45 spaces =

  

 
i q
tf

l
te

 

Fig. 6. Example of catibration of the ocutar micrometer
with the 100 (oil emersion) objective and x10 ocular.
Note: 73 spaces = 0.07 mm = 70 wm; 1 space = 1.04 jum.

Bibliography

Adam KMG, Zaman PJV: Medical and Veterinary
Protozoology.

 

condon, Churchill Livingstone, 197t.
Arundel JH: Fiekd procedures for counting gastrointestinal
92-597,

 

worms in sheep and cattle. Aust Vet } 4325
1967.

Beane RI, Hobbs N7: The Baermam technique for esti-
nating Profostrongylus infection in bighorn sheep:
Elfect of laboratory procedures. | Wild Dis 19:7-9,
1983.

Bowman DD: Georgis' Parasitology for Veterinarians. 7th
edititon. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1999.

Brunner (J, I lendrix CML, Blagburn BL, et als
Comparison of serologic tests for detection of antigen
in canine heartworm infections. } Ant Vet Med Assoc
192:1423-1427, 1988.

Calpin JP, Prestwood AK: Diagnosis of protozom infec

 

 

tions. In Greene CE (ed): Clinical Microbiology aud

 

lufections Diseases of the Dog and Cat. Philadelphia,
WB. Saunders Go., 1984, pp. 137-143.

Christie N, Jackson I: Specitic identification of strongyle
cxgs in sntall samples of sheep feces. Res Vet Sci,
32113117, 1982.

 

   

D. 1D, Lindguist WD: Determination of speci
ty of certain helminch egys using sucrose gradient cen-

 

 

trifugation. | Parasitol 65:916-919, 1982.

Diagnostic Parasitology

Foreyt WJ: Diagnostic Parasitology. In Parry BW (ed: The
Clinical
Pathology, Part II. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co,
1989, pp. 979-1000.

Foreyt Wh: Recovery of nematode eggs ancl larvae in deer:

Veterinary Clinics of North Americ

 

Evaluation of fecal preservation methods. J Am Ver
Med Assoc 9:1065~1067, 1986.

Garcia LS, Ash LR: Diagnostic Parasitology Clinical
Laboratory Manual. 2nd edition. St. Louis, CV Mosby,
1979.

Gibbs HC, Herd RP, Murrell KD (eds): The Veterinary
Clinics of North America: Food Auinal Practice -
Parasites: Epidentiology and Control. Philadelphia,
W.B. Saunders Co., 1986.

Gordon H, MeL, Whitlock HV: A new technique for
counting nematode eggs in sheep feces. Council Sei Ind
Res (Australia), (2+ , 1939.

Grieve RB (ed): The Veterinary Clinics of North America:
Small Animal Practice - Parasitic Infections.
Philadetphia, WB. Saunders Co., 1987.

Hangay G, Dingley M: Biological Museum Methods. Vol.
2. Plants, Invertebrates and Techniques. Academic
Press, New York, 1955.

Herd RP (ed): The Veterinary Clinics of North America:
Equine Practice - Parasitology. Philadelphia, WB.
Saunders Co., 1986.

Hubert J, Kerboeuf 1D: A new method for culture of larvae
used in diagnosis of ruminant gastrointestinal strongy-

 

 

losis: Comparison with fecal cultures. Caw f Comp
Med, 48:63~-71, 1984.

Jorgensen RJ; Isolation of infective Dictyoeuttus tarvac
from herbage. Vet Parasitol, 1:61-67, 1984.

Lappin MR, Calpin JP, Prestwood AK: Laboratory clingno-
sis of protozoal infections. In Green C.F. (ed): Infections
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, Philadelphia, WB.
Saunclers Co., 1990, pp. 751-762.

McKenna PB: The diagnostic value and interpretation of
fecal egg counts in sheep. N Z Vet J 29:129-132, 1981.

Melvin DM, Brooke MM: Laboratory Procedures for the
Diagnosis of Intestinal Parasites. US. Dept. of Heath
and Hunian Services, Public Heatth Service, Atlanta,
Georgia, 1980.

Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. Manual of
Veterinary Parasitological Laboratory Techniques.
‘Technical Bulletin No. 18, London, Ebenezer Baylis and
Son, The Trinity Press, 1976.

Parry BY {ed}: The Veterinary Clinics of North Auerica:

 

 

Sonill Animal Practice—Clinical Pathology. Part 2.
Philadelphia, WB. Saunders Go., 1989.

Pritchard MUL, Kruse GOW: The Collection and
Preservation of Animal Parasites. Lincoln, Nebraska,
University of Nebraska Press, 1982.

Reinecke RK: Identification of helminthes in ruminants at
newopsy. } S Afr Ver Assoc $5:135-143, 1984.

 

 
Section 1

Roberts JL, Swan RA: Quantitative studies of ovine
haemonchosis L Relationship between fecal egg counts

63-171, 1981.

agnosis of
Parasitism in Small Ruminants. In Gibbs HC, Herd RP,
Murrell KD (eds): The Veterinary Clinics of North
America: Food Animat Practice ~ Parasites:
Epidemiology and Control, Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders
Co., 1986, pp. 335-344.

Sloss MW, Kemp RI, Zaiak AM: Veterinary Clinical
Parasitology. 6th edititon. Ames, lowa, lowa State

and total worm counts. Vet Parasitol
Schillhorn van Veen ‘TW4 Methods for C

   

 

  

10

University Press, 1994.

‘Taunt AL, Elliott SH, Kelly MT, et al: Comparisan of
formatin-ctlyl ether sedimentation, formatin-ethsl ac-
etate sedimentation, and zinc sulfate flotation tech.

 

niques for detection of intestinal parasites. J Clin
Microbiol 13:882-884, 1981,
Whiteley HE: Your diagnostic protocol for Dirofilaria int-
mitis infection in dogs, Vet Med, 8:328-345, 1988,
Williams JF, Zajac A: Diagnosis of gastrointestinal para-
sitism in dogs and cats. Ralston Purina, St. Louis,
Missouri, 1980.

 
Section 2

GENERAL PARASITOLOGY

Classification Simplified

Table 11, Parasite classification simplified

 

Example: Ascaris sun, the swine roundworm
Kingdom — Animalia
Phylum - Nemathelmintes
Class — Nematoda
Subclass — Secernentea (Phasmida)}
Order — Ascaridata
Superfamily ~ Ascaridoidea
Family — Ascarididae
Subfamily - Ascaridinae
Genus — Ascaris
Species — siz
Classification of Parasites of Veterinary Interest

 

Phylum: Sarcomastigophora (Protozoa), the single-celled animals

Subphylum: Sarcodina (Amocbas) Example: Entomoeba sp. in swine
Subphylum: Mastigophora (Flagetlata) Example: Giardia canis in dogs,
Trichomonas sp. in birds
Subphylum: Apicomplexa (Sporozoa) Example: Toxoplasma gondii in cats,
Eimeria spp. in reminants
Subphylum: Citiophora (Citiata) Example: Balantidium coli in swine

 

Phylum: Nemathelminthes, the roundworms
Class: Nematoda

Superfamily: Ascaridoidea, the ascarids, very large worms in the intestine, direct life cycles

Family: Ascaridae Example: Ascaris sium in swine

Heterakidae Examp|

 

Heterakis gallinarum in poultry

Superfamily: Oxyuroidea, the pinworms, females have long pointed tails, direct life cycles

 

 

Family: Oxyuridae Example: Oxyuris equi in horses
Superfamily: Spiruroidea, the spiruroids, spiral tails in males, use intermediate hosts
Family Spiruridae Example: Habronema microstoma in horses
‘Thelaziidae Example: Thelazia lacrimalis in horses
Acuariidae Example: Physaloptera rara in dogs

Superfamily: Metastrongyloidea, the hmgworms, smail buccal capsule, usually have intermediate hosts

   

Family Metastrongylidae Example: Metastrongylus apri in swine
Protostrong ylidae Example: Muellerius capillaris in goats
Crenosomatidae Example: Crenosoma vulpis in dogs
Filaroididae Example: Aelurostrongylus abstrusus in cats

11
Section 2

Table LL. Parasite classification simplified (continued)

ee—a—=_53030000Re eee

Superfamily: Trichostrongyloidea, small hairlike worms, “strongyles”, large bursa in males

Family: Trichostrongylidae Example: Haemonchus contortus in sheep
Heligmonsomuatidae Example: Nematospiroides ditbius in mice
Amidostomatidae Example: Amidostomum anseris in ducks
Ollulanidae Example: Ollulanus tricuspis in cats
Dictyocaulidac Example: Dictyocaulus viviparus in cattle

Superfamily: Rhabditoidea, free living cycles, very small worms, small buccal capsule

Famil Strongyloididae Example: Strongyloides westeri in horses

 

Superfamily: Strongyloidea, large buccal capsule, cuticular appenchages,

        
  

 

 

‘amil Strongylidae sample: Strongylus unlgaris in horses
“Trichonematidae Example: Oesophagostomum radiatum in cattle
Ancylostomatidae Example: Aneylostoma caninum in dogs
Stephanuridac Example: Stepbanurus dentatus im swine
Syngamidae Example: Syngamus trachea in birds

Superfamily; Filarioidea, the filarioids, long slender worms, have microfilariae in the blood

Famil Filariidae Example: Parafilaria bovicola in cattle
Setariidae Example: Setaria equina in horses
Onchacercidae Example: Dirofilaria immitis in dogs

 

Phylum: Nemathelminthes, the roundworms
Class: Nematoda (continued)

Superfamily: Dracumculoidea, rare in domestic animals
Family: Dracunculidae Example: Dracunculus medinensis in dogs

Superfamily: Trichuroidea, Jong narrow esophagus with stichisome cells
Family: Trichuridae Example: Trichuris suis im swine

Trichinellidae E

 

sample: ‘Trichinella spiralis in swine

Superfamily: Dioctophymoidea, the large kidney worm. ‘These are rare in domestic animals.

Family: Dioctophymatidae Example: Dioctopbyme renate in dogs

 

 

Phylum: ‘Acanthocephala — thomy-headed worm (Macracanthorhynchus sp. in swine)

 

Phylum: Platyhelninthes — flatworms
Class: Trematoda, flukes
Subclass:

 

Jonogenea, mostly on fish ar amphibians and reptiles.
Subclass: Digenea, alternation of sexual and asexual generations, one or more termediate hosts

    

 

 
  

Family: Fasciolidac Example: Fasciola hepatica m cattle
Paramphistomatidae Example: Paramphistomum cervi in cattle
Dicrocoeliidae Example: Platynosoma fastosum in cats
Opisthorchiidae Example: Metorchis conjuctus in dogs
Heterophyidac 7 Cryptocotyle lingua in dogs
Troglotrematidae 2 Paragonimus kellicotti in cats \
Echinostomatidae 7 Eebinostoma revolutum in birds
Strigeidac Example: Alaria canis in dogs
Plagiorchidae xample: Prosthogoninus macrorchis in birds
Schistosomatidae <ample: Schistosoma nasali in horses

12
Table 11. Parasite classification simplitied (contined)

Class: Cestoidea, tapeworms

Order: Psendophyllidae, scolex unarmed, bothria present

Order: Cyclophyttidea, scolex with four suckers
Family:

 

Davaineidae, scoles
armed, small intestine
of birds

Anoplocephalidae,
scolex unarmed
without rostellum

Mesocestoididae,
scolex without
rostellum, median.
genital pores

Dilepididae, rostethim
armed, two lateral
genital pores

Hymenolepididae,
small intestine of birds,
mammals, and humans

   

 

:xampler
Example:

Example:

Example:

Example:

Example:

Example:

 

General Parasitology

Diphyllobotbrium latum in dogs
Spirometra sp. in cats

Davainea sp. and Raillietina sp. in birds
Moniezia benedeni in cattle

Mesocestoides sp. in cats

Dipylidiion caninwn in dogs

Hymenolepis sp. in rats

 

Taeniidae, scoles Example: Echinococcus granulosus in dogs
armed, genital pore
Jateral
Phylim: Arthropoda
Class: Insecta, the insects
Order: Diptera - flies Example: Musca spp., Sipbona sp., on cattle
Siphonaptera — fleas Example: Ctenocephalides sp. on dogs
Mallophaga ~ biting lice Examph Bovicola spp. on cattle,

Anoplura - sucking lice

Class: Arachnida

Order: Araneida - spiders

Order: Acarina — mites and ticks
Ixodidae — hard ticks
Argasidae — soft ticks
Dermanyssidae — mites
Sarcoptidae — mites
Demodlicicdae — mites
Cheyletidae — mites
Psoroptidae — mites

Family

13

 

 

xample:

Example:
Example:
Example:
Example:

 

Example:
Example:
Example:

Trichodectes sp. on dogs
Haematopinus sp., Linoguathus sp. on horses

Dermacentor sp., etc.
Otobius sp., etc.
Dermanyssis sp., etc.
Sarcoptes sp., ete.
Demodex sp., ete.
Cheyletiella sp., ete.
Psoroptes spy, ete.
Section 2

Bibliography

 

Anderson RC: Nematode Parasites of Vertebrates.
Cambridge, United Kingdom, University Press,
1992.

Anderson RC, Chabaud AG, Willmot § (eds): CH
Keys to the Nematode Parasites of Vertebrates.
Farnham Royal Bucks, England. Commonwealth
Agricultural Bureau.

No 1. Anderson RC, Chabaud AG, Willmot S:
General Introduction, Glossary of Terms, Key's to
Subclasses, Orders anck Superfamilies, 1974.

No 2. Hartwich G: Keys to Genera of the
Ascariloklea, 1974.

No 3. Chabad AG, Anderson RC, Bain O: Keys
to the Order Spirurida (3 parts), 1975-1976,

No 4, Petter AJ, Quentin JC: Keys to Genera of
the Oxyuroidea, 1976.

No 5. Anderson RC: Keys to Genera of the
Superfamily Metastrongyloidea, 1976.

No 6. Chaband AG: Keys to Genera of the
Superfamilies Seurataidea, Cosmaceroidea,
Heterakoidea anc Subuluroidea, 1976.

No 7. Lichtenfels JR: Keys to Genera of the
Superfamily Strongyloidea, 1980,

No 8, Lichtenfels JR: Keys to Genera of the
Superfamilies Ancylostomatoidea and
Diaphanocephaloidea, 1980.

No 9, Anderson RC, Bain O: Keys to the
Dioctophymatoidea, Rhalxlitoidea, Trichuroidea and
Muspiceoidea, 1982.

No 10, Durette-Desset MG Keys to Genera of
the Superfamily ‘Lrichostrongyloidea, 1983.

 

Bowman DD: Georgis* Parasitology for Veterinarians.
7th edition. Philadelphia, W.B. Saumders Co, 1999.

Brown HW, Neva FA: Basic Clinical Parasitology. 5th
edition. Norwalk, Connecticut, Appleton-Century-
Crofts, 1983.

Cheng TC: The Biology of Animal Parasites,
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1964.

Davis JW, Anderson RC (eds): Parasitic Diseases of
Wild Animals. Ames, lowa, Iowa State University
Press, 1971.

Davis JW, Anderson RC, Karstad L, Trainer DO (eds):
Infectious and Parasite Diseases of Wild Birds.
Ames, Iowa, Iowa State University Press, 1971.

Dunn AM: Veterinary Helmintbology. London,
William Heinemann Medical Books Ltd., 1978.

Flynn RS: Parasites of Laboratory Animals. Ames,
lowa, lowa State University Press, 1973.

Forrester, DJ: Parasites and Diseases of Wild Mammals
in Florida. Gainesville, Florida, University Press of
Florida, 1992.

Fowler ME (ed): Zoo G* Wild Animal Medicine. 2nd

 

14

edition. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1986.

Fowler ME {ed}; Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine.
Current Therapy 3. Philadelphia, WB. Saunders Co..
1993, °

Gaafer SM, Howard WE, Marsh RE (eds}: Parasites,
Pests, and Predators. New York, Elsevier, 1985.

Gibbs HC, Herd RP, Murrell KD (eds): The Veterinary
Clinics of North America: Food Animal Practice—
Parasites; Epidemiology and Control. Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1986.

Greene CE (ed): lifections Diseases of the Dog and
Cat, Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1990.

Grieve, RB (ed): The Veterinary Clinics of North
America: Sinall Animal Practice — Parasitic
Infections. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Ci

Gutierrez Y: Diagnostic Pathology of Parasitic
Infection with Clinical Correlation. Philadelphia,
Lea and Febiger, 1990.

Hendrix CM: Diagnostic Veterinary Parasitology,
Mosby, 1998.

Herd RP (ed): The Veterinary Clinics of North
America: Equine Practice—Parasitology.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1986.

Kranz GW: A Manual of Acarology. 2nd edition.
Corvallis, Oregon, Oregon State University Book
Stores, 1978.

Lapage E (ed): Mosig'’s Veterinary Hebninthology and

 

 

, 1987.

 

 

 

Entomology, 3th edition. Baltimore, Maryland,
William & Wilkins, 1962,

Lapage, G: Veterinary Parasitology. 2nd edition.
Springfielt, Hlinois, Charles C. Thomas, 1968.

Lee JJ, [Jutner SH, Bovee EG (eds): An Mlustrated
Guide to the Protozoa. Lawrence, Kansas, Allen
Press, 1985.

Levine ND: Nematode Parasites of Domestic Animals
and of Man, 2nd edition. Minneapolis, Minnesota,
Burgess Publishing Co., 1980.

Levine ND: Protozoan Parasites of Domestic Animals
and Man, Minneapolis, Minnesota, Burgess
Publishing Co., 1980.

Levine ND; Textbook of Veterinary Parasitology.
Minneapolis, Minnesota, Burgess Publishing
Company, 1978.

Moniz, HO: Veterinary Helminthology and
Entomology. 5th edition. London, Bailliere, Tindall
and Cox, 1986.

Olsen OW: Animal Parasites: Their Biology and Life
Cycles. 2nd edition. Minneapolis, Minnesota,
Burgess Publishing Co., 1967.

Plumb DC: Veterinary Drug Handbook. 3rd edition.
Ames, Iowa, Iowa State University Press, 1998.

Samuel WM, Pybus MJ, Kocan AA: Parasitic Diseases
of Wild Mammats. 2nd edition. Ames, Iowa, Iowa
State University Press, 2001.
Schell. SC: I fandbook of Trematodes of North America
North of Mexico. Mascow, Idaho, University Press
of Idaho, 1985.

Schmidt GA: Handbook of Tapeworm Identification.
Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press, 1986.

Sloss MW, Kemp RL, Zajak AM: Veterinary Clinical
Parasitology, 6th edition. Ames, Iowa, Iowa State
University Press, 1994,

Soulsby EJL: Helminths, Arthropods and Protozoa of
Domesticated Animals (Monnig). Philadelphia, Lea
& Febiger, 1968.

Soulsby EJL: Textbook of Veterinary Clinical
Parasitology. Philadelphia, B.A. Davis Company,
1965.

15

General Parasitology

Thienpont D, Rochette 5, Vanparijs OF: Diagnosing
Helminthiasis Through Coprological Examination.
Beerse, Belgium, Janseen Research Foundation,
1979.

Urquhart GM, Armour J, Dimean JI., Dima AM,
Jennings FW: Veterinary Parasitology. 2nd edition.
Oxford, England, Blackwell Science, 1996,

Wallach JD, Boever W J: Diseases of Exotic Animals.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1983.

Williams JF, Zajac A: Diagnosis of Gastrointestinal
Parasitism in Dogs and Cats, Ralston Purina
Company, Saint Louis, Missouri, 1980.
      
  

Section 3.

a

PARASITES OB.DQGS «si

ne

tS!

a \ ¥ i

on
My
a

Ancylostoma
caninum

60x 40m

Uncinaria’*
stenocephala:
72 x 45 um

 
   

Alasia canis
122x 76am

ae

Fig. 7. Common parasite eggs and oocysts found in clog feces.

17 SIS-UK VFI
Brno
Section 3

+ Location of Major Parasites

Zoonotic Diseases

Ectoparasites

Fleas - Clenacephalides canis
Ctenacephalides felis

     
 

Parasites of Dogs

Echidnophaga spp.
Ticks - Ixodes spp.

Connective Tissue Dermacentor spp,

   
  
  

Angiostrongylus cantonensis
Rhipicephalus sanguinius
lice - Trichodecles canis

 
      
 
  
 
  
 

Linognathus selosus
Bladder Mies - Demodex canis
Heart & Lungs Olodect -ynolis
sparta off fectes cynolis
Dirofilaria immitis Gepilena Pilea Sarcoptes scabei

Fitaroides (Oslerus) osteri
Filaroides hirthi

Flies ~Culerebra spp.tarvae

Capillaria aerophila

Cecum & Colon

Trichuris vupis:

Gnathostoma Smal! Intestine }

Spirocerca
Physaloplera Toxocara canis Taeria ovis
Toxascavis leonina Taeria serials

Uncinaria stenocephala Taenia mutticeps
Ancylostoma caninum Taenia hydatigena
Strongyloides stercoralis Taenia pisiformis
Dipylidium caninum

Echinococcus granulosus

Fig. 8. Locations of the major parasites found in clogs.

18
Table 12. Major zoonotic diseases associated with dogs

Parasites of Dogs

 

 

Organism Disease Method of Infection
Protozoa
Entomoeba bistolytica Amoebiasis Ingestion
Leishmania donovani Visceral leishmaniasis Contact with arthropod vector
Leishmania donovani Cutancous leishmaniasis Contact with arthropod vector
Pneumocystis carinii Pneumocystis infection Ingestion or inhalation
Trypanosoma cruzi Trypanosomiasis Contact with arthropod vector
Nematodes
Ancylostoma spp. Cutaneous larva migrans Contact with larvae
Dirofitaria imm itis Dirofilariasis Bite of mosquito
Strongyloides spp. Cutancous larva migrans Contact with larvae
Strongyloides stercoralis Strongyloidiasis Ingestion of larvae
Toxocara canis Visceral larva migrans Ingestion of larvated eggs
Cestodes
Dipylidiunr canimun Dipylidiasis Ingestion of cysticercoid in flea
Echinococcus granulosus Hydatid cyst disease Ingestion of eggs
Echinococcus multilocutaris Alveolar hydatid disease Ingestion of eggs
Arthropods
Cheyletietta spp. Acariasis Contact with infected dog
Sarcoptes scabiei Acariasis Contact with infected dog

 

  

Visceral Larva Migrans

 

Fig. 9, Visceral larva migrans caused by Toxocarat can
(See also page 21.)

Cutaneous Larva Migrans ys

Yrs

\

i

Fig. 10, Curancous larva migrans “creeping eruptions”
caused by Ancylostoma spp. (See also page 22.)

*»

wy

19
 

Section 3

Drugs

Table 13. Efficacy of anthelmintics against major internal parasites of cats and dogs

Dose (ng/kg PO)

Parasites Susceptible

 

 

Drug Common Trade Name
Bumamidine HC Scolaban
Dichlorophene Various
Dichlorvos ‘Task

Diethylearbamazine Caricide/Filaribits

Disophenol Various/DNP
Dithiazanine Dizan
Epsiprantel Cestex

Febantel + praziquantel Drontal Plus

+ pyrantel pamoate

 

 

Fenbendazole Panacur
Ivermectin lvomec
lvomec
Heartgard
Mebendazole Telmintic
Melarsomine Immiclicide
Methylbenzene + Various
dichlorophene
Metronidazole Flagyl
Milbemycin oxime Interceptor
Niclosamide Yomesan
n-butyl chloride Various
is often mixed with toluene
Piperazine Various
Praziquantel Droneit
Praziquantel + pyrantel Drontal
Pyrantel pamoate Neme:
Selamectin Revolution
Thenium closylate + Various

piperazine

25-50
220
5-33

3.0-6.6 daily

100

7.5-10 (2nd dose im two weeks)
204 Mhx 3-13. d

   

 

5.5 (dogs) 2.8 (cats)
q 24h x 3d (dogs
Combination product

 

cats)

50q24hx3d

0.2 SC

0.05
0.006 (30-day intervals)
20.q 24hx 3-204

2.5 myfkg IM, twice,
24 hours apart
200-275 mp/kg of each drug PO

25. q IZhx 5d (dog)
10-25 q 12 hx 5d (cat)
0.5 (30-day intervals)

100 (dog), 200 (cat)
Read the label

100-250 (2nd dose after 10
days), or 100-150 q 24 hx2d

5-50

Combination product

15 (dog), 20-30 (cat)

6-12 (topical)

500 q24hx 1d
250q 24hx2d

Cestodes

Cestodes

Ascarids, hookworms,
whipworms

Heartworm prevention (L4)

Asearids

Hookworms

Miscellaneous nematodes,
heartworm microfilariae

Tapeworms

Tapeworms

Ascaris, hookworms,
whipworms, tapeworms

Ascarids, hookworms,
Giardia, whipworms,
‘Taenia spp. tapeworms

Whipworm, many other
nematodes

Heartworm microflariae

Heartworm prevention

Asearids, hookworms,
whipworms

Adult heartworms

Asearids, hookworms,
cestodes
Giardia

Heartworm preventative,
hookworms, ascarids

Cestodes

Ascaridsfhookworms

Ascarids

Cesiodes

Cestodes, ascarids, hookworms

Ascarids, hookworms

Heartworm prevention,
hookworms, ascarids (cats),
many arthropods

Hook worms, ascarids

 

 

Note: Read label directions carefully. The label is the most authoritative source of information (See Courtney and

Sumdlof, 1991}.

20
Parasites of.Dogs

  

Internal Parasites

Toxocara canis

Common name: Ascarid or rowndworm (Ascandoiden’

Dichlorvos,
Fenbendazok

   

Fig. 11b. Toxocara canis (arrows). Toxascaris leonina is Fig. 11¢. Toxocara canis.
also shown {lower right).

21

 
Toxascaris leonina

Common name: Ascarid or roumdworm (Ascaridoidea).
Size of adult: 6-17 cm in small intestine.
Size of egg: 80 um x 70 um.
Importance; Chronic diarrhea and ill thrift, not a
zoonatic disease.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Treat when any eggs are detected,
Dichlorvos, 100 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24hx3d
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24hx 5d
Piperazine, 110-200 mgfkg PO3 repeat in 10 days.
Pyrantel, 5-10 mg/kg PO, bitches prior to whelping.
Note: A 1% solution of sodium hypochlorite removes
the albumin coat from ascarid eggs, and eggs can
then be washed away with steam sterilization.

 

Toxascaris teonina

 

  

Trichuris vulpis

Common name: Whipworm (Trichuroidea).
Size of adult: 3-8 cm in cecum.

Size of egg: 75 jum x 40 jum.
Importance: Typhiitis, weight loss, diarrhea. Not a
zoonotic disease.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
Treatment; Treat when any eggs are detected.
Dichlorvos, 30 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24hx3d

Trichuris vulpis

Ivermectin, 0.1 mg/kg SC PO
Mebendazole, 20 mg/kg PO q 24 h x 3-20 d
Note: Eggs in the environment are difficult to kill.
(Bleach x1 %}, steam sterilization, and clirect sun-
light are helpful in kennel situations.

>

Fig, 13a. Trichuris uulpis prepatent period is 3 months.
Ancylostoma caiinuunt

Common name: Southern hookworm (Strongyloidea}.
Size of adult: 8-16 mum in small intestine.
Size of egg: 60 jum x 40 jum.
Importance: Anemia, weakness, poor growth.
Cutaneous larva migrans in humans.
Diagnosis: s in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Treat when eggs are detected.
Butamisole, 2.4 mg/kg SC
Dichlorves, 30 mg/kg PO
Disophenol, 2.2 mg/kg SC
Fenbendazole, 50 mgfkg PO q 24h x 3d
Ivermectin, 0.05 mg/kg SC or PO
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3-5 4
Milbemycin oxime, 0.5 mg/kg PO
Pyramel, 5-10 mg/kg PO

o
@ : .
Sa 8 Thenium closylate, $0 mg/kg PO q 12hx 1d
Note: For larvicicda! treatment of kennels use sodium

Fig. 14a, Ancylastoma caninen prepatent period is 2 weeks. borate (Borax} 10 tb. per 100 ft? or 1% bleach.

  
     

Ancylosioma caninum

 

22,
Parasitesiof Dogs

 

Fig. 14b. Ancylostoma caninum.

Fig. L4c, Aucylostoma caninum.

23
Section 3

 

Uncinaria stenocephala

Nene nad

 

Fig, 1a. Uncinaria stenocephata prepatent period is 2 weeks.

 

Strongyloides stercoralis

—e

Fig, 16a. Strongyloides stercoralis prepatent period is 1 week.

 

Dirofilaria immitis

Fig. 17a. Dirofilaria immitis preparent period is 6-7 months.

Uncinaria stenocephala

Common name: Northern hookworm (Steongyloidea).
Size of adult: S-12 mm in small intestine.
Size of egy: 75 yun x 45 Jam.
Importance: Less pathogenic than Ancylostoma spp. Worms ly:
cutting plates rather than teeth. Not a zoonotic dise:
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Treat when egys are cletected.
Butamisole, 24 mg/kg SC
Dichlorvos, 30 mg/kg PO
Disophenol, 2.2 mg/kg SC
Fenbendazole, $0 mg/kg PO q 24hx 3d
Ivermectin, 0.05 mg/kg SC or PO
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 3-5 d
Pyrantel, 5-10 my/ky PO
‘Thenium closylate, 50 mg/kg PO g 12hx 1d

ave
ase.

Strongyloides stercoralis

Common name: Threadworm (Rhabditoidea).

Size of adult: 0.7-2.2 mm in small intestine,

Size of egg: SS tun x 30 pm.

Importance: Severe diarrhea, pneumonia and dermatitis. Causes
severe illness and diarrhea in human infants.

Diagnosis: Fecal flotation (must be very fresh), larvated eggs and
larvae in feces, Baermann technique for farvae, skin scrap-
ing when dermatitis is mvolved. No transplacental or trans-
mammary infection.

Treatment: Treat when eggs or larvae are detected.

Diethylcarbamazine, 100 mg/kg PO
tvermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO
Mebendazole, 20 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 3-144

Dirofilaria inunitis

Common name: Hearnvorm (Filarioidea).

Size of adult in heart: 12-30 cm microfilariae in blood.

Size of microfilaria: 270-325 jun x 6.7-7.0 tun.

Importance: Causes congestive heart failure in dogs, pulmonary
and skin fesions in humans.

Diagnosis: Microfilariac in blood. Knott's test, buffy coat exami-
nation, direct blood smeaz, millipore filteation of blood,
various serologic tests.

Note: Adult heartworms can five for 8 years.

‘Treatment for adults: Melarsomine dihydrochloride
(Immidicide), 2.5 mg/kg IM, given twice 24 hours apart.

‘Treatment for microfilariac: Ivermectin, 0.05 mg/kg SC or PO

Levamisole, Il mgéky PO q 24 hx 7-10 d (given starting 2
weeks after caparsolate).
Milbemycin oxime, 0.5 mg/kg PO

Treatment as prophylaxis: Diethylearbamazine, 1.2 mg/kg PO q
24h during mosquito season.

Ivermectin, 0.006 my/ky PO every 30 days.
Milbemycin oxime, 0.5 mg/kg every 30 days.
Moxidectin, 0.03 mg/kg PO every 30 days.
Selamectin, 6-12 mg/kg (topically) every 30 days.

24
Parasitesof:Dogs,

ts

Fig. 17b. Dirofilaria immitis. Fig. 17¢. Dirofilaria inmnitis.

 

25
 

Section 3

 

g Table 14. Comparison of microfilariae of Dirofilaria immitis anc Dipetalonema reconditum

 

Parameter Dirofilaria immitis Dipetalonema reconditum
Numbers present Many Very few
Motility Nonprogressive Progressive
Head shape Tapered Blunt

Acid phosphatase stain Excretory, anal pores Diffuse
Tail Straight Button hook
Body Straight Curved
Length by Knott’s test (jtm) 280-320 215-270
Length by filter test (tm) 235-285 215-240
Width by Knott's test (Jum) 6.1-7.2 47-58
Width by filter test (jem) 5.8-7.0 4n5

 

Table 14a. Interpretation of heartworm tests

 

Heartworm Microfilariae

 

Present in Knott’s Test Antigen Test Results and [Recommendations]

Positive Positive Patent heartworm infection [Freat with aculticide,
microfilaricide, use preventative]

Negative Positive False-negative Knott’s test, no adults present, immature

worms only, all male or female worms, treated with a
microfilaricide, antibody against microfilariae [Treat
with adulticide, use preventative]

Positive Negative False-positive Knott’s test, few worms present, recent
patent infection, immume response that removes or
masks the antigens cletected in the serological tests,
misidentification of the microfilariac observed [Treat
with microfilaricide, use preventative]

Negative Negative No heartworms present, low worm burden, immature
worms present, immune mediated occult infection
[Use preventative if in heartworm transmission area]

 

Note: Modified Knott's tests are generally used for microfilariae detection, and at this time antigen tests (ELISAs)
are primarily recommended for serological tests. (See Blagburn, 1994; Henry and Dillon, 1994).

26
Parasites of Dogs

   

Y HEARTWORM: DISEASE AE RTT STE Protocol ij

 

 
  
  
  

 
  
  
   

      

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

   

    

 
  
 
    

Do Not Suspect Infection
Cunfiem With OO eauaL ——
Antigen Test* | x0 —- Suspect Infection
aby collins - Based On ‘Signs, History)
Ginical Or
> om Laboratory
Inalications? =
Repeat Screening Test as Goniiem wi a
at ea ger \$——|
() {+) t Pp
Repeat onduct Pretreatment Evaluation Using
Antigen el we] Appropeiste Meaos, For Example. [a occurr
ten |e t)-*} INFECTION Radiogeaphy, Serum Chemistry Profile, INFECTION
Urinalysis, CBC, Worm Burden Estima.
RR tion 2" And Other Tests As Indicated,
(Few Or No
‘Worms Present)

(For Patear

   
 

 

    
   
  

 

 

Administer rrtt af For

Microfilaricide Oceule

Until Seceening Infections,
a Aulminister
ee

le ~-

 

 

 

18. Diagnostic protocol for diagnosis and treatment of hearnworms (Dirofilaria inmnitis)

“In addition to antigen test, eadiography, echocardiogeaphy, antibody, and other tests may be used to aid cliagnosis.
dey jew odicti

perts helieve that predicting worm hurden could provide a useful guide for prognosis and treatment.
(With permission from De. Charles Ef, Courmey, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, and Agri Tech Systems, Inc.,
Portland, Maine.)

 

27
Section 3

2

ax

-“Dipetalonema sesame)

 

Fig. 19a. Dipetalonema reconditum prepatent period is
6t-68 days.

 

Filaroides osteri

“

Fig. 20a. Filuruides (Qslerus) osleri nm bronchi. E birthi in
pulmonary parenchyma. Preparent period is 10 weeks for
F. osleri amd 5 weeks for F birthi.

  

 

 

Fig. 21a. Physaloptera spp. preparent period is 58-83 de,

Dipetalonema reconditiun

Common name: (Filarioidea).

 

ze of adult: 4-8 cm in subcurancous tissues,
Size of microfilariae: 215-270 im x 4.7-3.8 pm,

Slightly smaller than microfilariag of Dirofitaria
inunitis (See Table 14).

Importance: Nonpathogenic. Must be differentiated

 

from Dirofilaria immitis because dogs infected
with Dipetalonema reconditiun are not treated.

Diagnosis: Microfilariae in blood (See Table 14).

Treatment: None needed; nonpathogenic.

 

Filaroides osteri

Common name: Tracheal worm (Metastrongyloidea).
Size of adu
bifurea

  
  

5-15 mm. E ogleri coiled in nodules at

tion of trachea. Adult F birthi in pul-
monary parenchyma.

Size of tirst stage larva: In trachea 237-267 jum in feces
325-378 jm.

Importance: Coughing, chronic tracheobronchitis.

 

Diagnosi

 

Larval in feces or sputum. Sputum smear,
transtracheal wash, or fecal flotation.
“Freatment: Treatment is experimental.
Albendazole, 25-50 myskp PO q 12 x 5d (repeat in
21 days)
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/ky PO q 24 hx 7d
Ivermectin, 0.4 myfky SC or PO

Physaloptera spp.

Common name: Stomach worm (Spiruroidea).

of adult: 3-6 em in stomach.

Size of exp: 40 gum x 30 jun.

Importance: Infrequently causes gastric mucosal ero-

 

sion and gastritis; adults attach with mouth parts.
Diagnosis: Larvated epgs in feces. Fecal flotation or
worms in vomits.
Treatment: ‘Freat when epys are detected.
Dichlorvos, 27-33 myskp,
Fenbendazole, 0 mg/ky PO q 24hx 5d
Ivermectin, 0.05-0.5 myfky SC or PO

 
Parasites of Dogs

 

Fig. 21¢. Physaloptera sp.

 

Fig. 21b. Physaloptera sp.

29
 

Section 3

DEFINITIVE HOSTS is
Ww in eegenee Nanophyetus salmincola

Common name: Salmon poisoning fluke
(Troglotrematidae).
Size of adult; 0.5-1.5 mm in small intestine.

  

of egg: 70 jum x 40 em.
Importance: Vector for Neorickettsia helmintheca

Fleet etiologi-
cal agent of salmon poisoning disease in dogs.
Hemorrhagic enteritis with generalized lyme
phadenopathy, vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy,
tence, fever, death.

Diagnosis: Gold, operculated eggs in feces. History, fecal

KSA flotation in sugar or fecal smear, clinical signs.
pr.

   
   
   
 
 

inappe-
MIRACIDIUM i

Peon or ‘Treatment of salmon poisoning (rickettsial disease):
CERCARIA with rediae ‘Treatment is necessary.
Oxytetracycline, 7 mg/kg IV q 12hx 3d
Fig. 22a, Nanophyetus salmincola prepatent period is S-7 Doxyeyeline, 10 mg/kg IV q 12h x7 d
days. (See also Fig. 52).) Treatment of Nanopbyetus salimincola: Treatment may be
beneficial.

Praziquantel, 2.5-5 mg/kg PO or SC
Note: Freezing or cooking fish will kill metacercariac.

Paragonimus kellicotti

Common name: Lung fluke (Troglotrematidae).
¢ of adult: 1,0-1.5 em in hing.
7 Size of egy: 90 pm x 50 pum.
eS Importance: May cause chronic respiratory disease.

Diagnosis: Gold operculated eggs in feces or sputum. Fecal
flotation in sugar or sputum smear,
Paragonimus kellicotti ‘Treatment: Treat when eggs are detected.
Albendazole, 25-50 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 14-21 d
EY Fenbendazole, 50 my/kg PO q 24h x 10-14 d
San

Praziquantel, 25 mg/kg PO q 24h x 2d

 

Fig. 23a. Paragoninms kellicotti prepatent period is 5-6
weeks.

Alaria spp.

Common name: Intestinal fluke (Strigeidae).

10 mm in smalf intestine.

Size of egg: 134 pan x 70 pm,

Importance: Mostly nonpathogenic. Limg migration may
cause some damage. Minor zoonotic potential from
Jarva! stages from intermediate hosts.

Diagnosis: Eggs in supar fecal flotation.

Treatment: Parasites are of minor significance umless large
numbers are present.

Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg PO =
Praziquantel, 10 mg/kg PO or SC

 

¢ of adult:

    

 

   

Fig. 24a. Aluria spp. peepatent period is 3 days.

30
 

Bie:
ee
Ea

Dees :

Fig. 24b. Alaria sp. (arrow), Nanophyetus.

 

 

   

31

Fig. 24c. Alavia
Nanophyetus.

   

‘Ge

  
   

row}. The other nwo eggs are
Section 3

 

> Taenia pisiformis @

Fig. 25a. ‘Tucaia pisiformis prepatent period is 2 months.

 

Dipylidium caninum

Fig. 26a, Dipylidium caninum prepatent period is |
month,

  

=e one
9

\
Fig. 27a, Echinocucens granttosus prepatent period is SO
days.

Taenia pisifor nis

Common name: Tapeworm (Taeniidac),

of adult; Up to 20 m in small intestine,

of egg: 38 gon X 32 jum.

Importance: Possible intestinal obstructions with heavy
infections. The usual Taenia in dogs is Taenig

bisiformis, which is acquired by eating cy

in rabbits.

 

ssticerci

Diagnosis: Segments in feces or on perianal region, eggs
in fecal) flotation.

   

at when eggs or segments are detected.
50 mgfkg PO

Dichlorophene, 220 mg/kg PO

Epsiprantel, 5.5 my/ky, PO

Fenbendazale, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3d
Mehendazole, 22 mgfky PO q 24hx 3-5 d
Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg, PO

Praziquantel, 2.5-5 mg/kg, PO

Treatment:
Bunamidine, 25

re

  

 

 

Dipyliditun caninum

Comnion name: Flea tapeworm (Dilepididae).

of adult: 15-75 em in small intestine,

25 jim-30 jun in oblong packets of 20 or

‘ggs packets are 200 jum x 150 jun.

ites the presence of fleas. Anal pruri-
tus, chronic enteritis, vomiting, or nervous disor-
ders may result. Will infect humans,

Diagnosis: Segments on feces or perianal region, fecal
flotation.

 
    

of eg,

 

fewer eggs

 

 

  

Importance: Indi

 

 

Treatment: Treat when egys or segments are detected.
Bunamidine 25-50 mgsky PO
Dichlorophene, 220 mg/kg PO

mgfkg PO

7 mgfky PO

Praziquantel, 2.5-5 mg/kg PO

Epsiprantel
Niclosamid

  

  

Echinococcus granulosus (sce also Figs. 52h and $2i)

 

Common name: Hydatid tapeworm (Faeniidae).

  
 

re of adult; 2-9 mm in small intestine.
ize of egg: 35 jun xX 30 pon,

Mild dis
genic or fatal in humans (hydatid cyst}.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. Eggs are indistin-

guishable from ‘Taenia spp. eggs.

      

Importan ase in carnivores; highly patho-

 

   

Treatment: Treat all dogs if suspected.
Bunamidine, 20-50 mgfkg (repeat in 2 days and in I
month).
Mehendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 3-5 d
Praziquantel, 25-50 mgky (preferred treatment).
Prevention: Do not feed infected sh

 

   

 

p or wild rumi-

 

nant viscera to dogs.
. Parasites, of, Dogs

 

Fig. 27b. Echinococcus gramlosus. Fig. 27c, Echinococeus gramlosus.

33
Section 3

Isopora spp.

Common name: Coccidia (Apicomplexa).

Size of oocyst: Isospora obioensis 24 jum x 24 yun;
Isospora bigimina 13 \un x 10 ym; Isospora canis
36 jun x 30 yum.

Importance; Mlay cause hemorrhagic enteritis, diarrhea,
poor growth. Primarily in puppies.

Diagnosis: Oocysts in fecal flotation; in small intestine.

Treatment: Treat if more than 1,000 oocyst/y and diar-
thea is present,

Sulfadimethoxine, 55 mgfkg PO g 24 hx 10 days, or

anti] asymptomatic for 2 days.

 

Prevention: Same as treatment,
Decoquinate, at | my/kg PO is used experimentally.
Note: Ionophores cam be toxic in dogs and cats.
Amprolium, 100-200 mg/kg q 24 h x 7 days (treat-
ment or prevention).

 

Sarcocystis spp.

Common name: None (Apicomplexa).
6 um xX 11 jum in small intestine,
Importance: Usually nonpathogenic, but is economical-

  

Size of sporocyst:

ly important in intermecliate hosts used for food
animals.
Diagnosis: Oocysts or sporocysts in fecal flotation.
Treatment: None available.
Prevention: Do not feed raw meat to dogs.

 

Sarcocystis sp.

Re ee Giardia canis

Common name: None (Mastigophora}.

Size of cy:
ymin small and large intestine.

 

18 jun X 10 pint; trophozoite: 17 gem x 10

Fig. 29a, Sarcocystis sp. prepatent period is 9-10 days.

Diarrhea, transmissible to humans.

 

Importan

Diagnosis: ‘Trophozoites or cysts in fecal flotation or
smear (must use fresh fecal material}. Several
ELISA tests are available,

‘Treatment: Treat if cliarrhea and Giardia are present.
Camidazole, 5 mgfkg q 24 hx 3 days
Metronidazole, 50 my-70/ky PO q 24h x5d
Quinacrine, PO or IM

Large dogs: 200 mg q 8h x | dor 200 mg q 12h
x6d
Small dogs: 100 mg q 12h x 1 dor 100 mg q 24h
x6d
Puppies: 50 mg q 12hx6d
Cats: 10 myfky q 24h x 12 d
Albendazole, 25 myfky q 12 hx 2 d (4 treatments)
Camidazole, 5 mg/kg q 24h x 3d
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg q 24h x 3d
Prevention: Giardia vaccines may be useful in chronic

    

Giardia canis

  

Fig. 30a. Giardia canis prepatent period is 1 week.

cases.

34
Parasites.of-Dogs

   
 
    

Fig. 28c, Isospora sp. (dividing).

 

Fig. 29b. Sarcocystis sp. Fig. 29c. Sarcocystis sp. Note sporozoites {arrows}

    

Fig. 30b. Giardia canis (cysts stained). Fig. 30c. Giardia canis (cysts in sugar flotation). Cytoplasm:

is compressed at one end.

 
Section 3

 

Fig, 31. Taenia hydatigena prepatent period is 7 weeks.

 

9

Taenia muiticeps

Fig. 32. Taenia multiceps prepatent period is 7-9 weeks.

 

Fig. 33. Taenia krabbei prepatent period is 7-8 weeks.

 

36

 

Taenia bydatigena

 

Common nam
of aduli
of egg: 38 gun x 32 tim. Essentially the same for

most Taenia spp. in dogs. Cysticerci in peritoneal

heep tapeworm (Taeniidae).
0 cm in smal] intestine.

    

cavity of sheep.
Importance: Low pathogenicity, source of infection for

 

sheep.
Diagnosis:

 

Eggs in fecal flotation, segments in feces or
on perianal region.
Treatment: Bumamidine, 25

 

  

(0 mg/kg PO
Dichlorophene, 220 mg/kg, PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3d
Mebendazole, 22 my/ky PO q 24 hx 3-5 d
Niclosamide, 157 mp/ky, PO

Praziquantel, 2.5-5.0 my/ky PO

  

Taenia multiceps

 

Common name: Gid tapeworm (Taeniidae).
of adult: 40-100 en1 in small intestine.
of egg: 38 tam x 32 pum.

Importance: Low pathogeni

 

  

   

. In sheep, the Coenurns

stage in the brain causes central nervous system
disorders (gid).

 

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation, segments in feces or
on perianal region,

Treatment: Bunamidine, 25-50 mg/ky, PO
Dichlorophene, 220 mp/ky PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/ky PO q 24h x 3d
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24h 3-5 d
Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg PO
Praziquantel, 2.5-5.0 mg/kg PO

 

 

 

Taenia krabbei

Common name: Deer or moose tapeworm (Taeniidae).

of adult: 26-100 em in small intestine,

of egy: 38 gum x 32 gun.

Importance: Low pathogenicity. Cysti

of mule deer, caribou, and moose.

Diagnosis:

on perianal region.

Treatment: Bunamidine, 25-50 mg/kg PO
Dichlorophene, 220 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 3d
Mebendazole, 22 mg&y PO q 24h 3-5 d
Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg PO

5.0 mg/kg PO

 

iin muscles

  

Eggs in fecal flotation, segments in feces or

 

 

 

 

Praziquantel,
 

Fig, 34. Capitlaria (Encoleus) aerophila prepatent period is
40 days.

 

se B33

Fig. 35. Dracinrculus insignis amd D. medinensis prepatent
period is 10-14 months.

 

Fig. 36. Dipbyloborhriunt latuns prepatent period is 3-4
weeks.

Parasites of Dogs

Capillaria aevophila

Common name: Fox Iungworm (Trichuroidea).

  

of adult: 2,5-3.2 em in lungs.
Size of egg: 70 wm x 35 ym,
Importance: May cause respiratory distress.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
‘Treatment; Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3-5 d
Ivermeetin, 0.2 mg/kg PO or SC
Levamisole, 2.5 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 5d

Dracunculus insignis

Common name: Guinea worm, dragon worm, firey ser-
pent (Dracunculoidea).

Size of adult; 1-200 em in subcutaneous tissue.

¢ of larvae: 500-750 jum.

ow pathogenicity, swellings on tibia and.

 
   

Important

 

tarsus, nonhealing ulcers.
Diagnosis: Nonhealing skin ulcers, isolation of larvae
from the ulcers.

 

‘Treaiment; Bunamidine,
Dichlorophene,
Niclosamide, 15
Praziquantel, 2
Surgical removal

50 mgfkg, PO
220 mgkg PO

mgfkg PO

.0 mgefkg PO or SC

  
 

Diphyllobothrizun latiun

Common name: Broad fish tapeworm (Psendophyllidea).

Size of adult: Up to 15 m in small intestine,

Size of egg: 75 pm x 4S pm.

Importance: Low pathogenicity. Reservoir of the infec-

tion for humans.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.

Treatment: Praziquantel, 7.5 mg/kg PO or SC.q24hx2d
Praziquantel, 35 mg/kg PO

Humans: Niclosamicle (Yomesan), 2 g PO (once)
Praziquantel, 5-20 mg/kg PO (once)

37
Section 3

Spirocerca lupi (See also Fig. 52k)

Common name: Esophageal worm (Spiruroidea},

of adult: 3-8 em in esophagus and stomach,

of egg: 40 jum x 12 jun, larvated.

Importance: May predispose to malignant tumors and

  

clystrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy.
Diagnosi:
Treatment: Diethylearbamazine, 500 mg/kg PO q 24h
x10d
Prevention: Do not feed raw chicken to dogs.

 

Eggs in feces in patent infections.

  
  
 

 

Spirocerca lupi

. CD

SS
SH

Fig. 37. Spirocerca lupi prepatent period is $-6 months.

Thelazia californiensis

Common name: Eyeworm (Spiruroidea).

Size of adult: 10-40 mm in conjunctival sac,

Size of egy: SS jun X 3S jum.

Importance; May cause conjunctivitis, lacrimation,
photophobia.

Thelazicalilomiensis Diagnosis: Eggs in lachrymal secretions. Parasites can
be seen in conjunctival sac.

  
 

Treatment: Surgical removal of worms from the con-
junctival sac under local anesthesia.
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg $C. or IM

Fig. 38. thelazia californiensis prepatent period is 16-20
days.

Dioctophyma renale

Common name: Giant kidneyworm
(Dioctophymoidea).

Size of adult: 35-105 em in kidney,

5 jun x 42 jun.

Destroy renal tissue, may cause peritonitis.

iggs in urine.

   
  

Size of egy:
Importance
Diagnosis:

  

 

‘Treatment: Surgical removal.
/ Prevention: Do not feed raw crayfish or fish (the inter-

  

Dioctophyma renale
Veen

“ge c

Fig. 39. Dioctophyma renale life cycle is up to 2 years.

mecliate hosts}.

 

 

38
External Parasites (See’alsé page 48)

 

Fig. 40b. Trichodectes canis. (See also Fig. 52h.)

 

Comat name: Biting louse of dogs (Mallophaga). Adults, nymphs, eggs in hair. In cats, the biting louse is Feticola ssib-
"stratus (uncommon).
Size 6 Fadult: 2-4 mm. Life cycle is 3 weeks.
Importance; Cause roughened haie coat, itching, dermatitis. May act as intermediate host of Dipylidisem caninton,
Diagnosis: Examination of the hair foc adults, nymphs, and eggs (nits).
Treatment: Cacharyl, coumaphos, diazinon, dioxathion, fenchlorphos (ronnel), lindane, methoxychlor, cotenone,
pyretheins, pyrethroids: teeat twice, 7 days apart.
Note: Many flea control products also kill lice and ticks.

   
 

| Linognathus setesus

Life cycle of Lingnathus setosus. Fig. 41b. Linognathus setosus. :

of dogs (Anophira).
cycle is 3 Weeks:

oui el
Ctenocephalides spp.

BS et”

Fig. 42a. Life cycle of Ctenocephatides canis and C. felis. Fig. 42b. Ctenocephalides felis.

 

 
  
  
    
    
  
  

Crenocephalides canis

te: Flea,
jules 3--4 iim: Life cycle is variable.

ilammals transiently. Eggs, larvae, and pupae are in the envionment.

ion of skin for adult fleas and “flea dirt”, dermatitis.

ugs used for flea control include fipronil (Frontline®) for adult fleas, ticks, and some mites and
rid (Advantage®) for adult fleas and some lice, but no mites or ticks; nitenpyram (Capstar®) for
ly; and'selamectin (Revolution®) for adult fleas, flea eggs, ear mites, sarcoptic mange, and some
igs that can be effective in a flea control program include: catbaryl, chlorfenvinphos, chlorpyri-
Gpronil, imidocloprid, phosmet, propoxur, pyrethcins, pyretheoids, and insect geowth regula-
prene and Iufenuron. Use as sprays, dips, dab ons, collars, etc.

Table 15. Fleas commonly encountered
on animals and bieds

 

Ctenocepbalides canis Dog flea
Ctenocephalides felis Cat flea

Pulex irritans Human flea
Echidnopbaga gallinacea _Sticktight flea
Labial patpus i Xenopsylla cheopis Oriental rat flea
Mesoplouron MA Cediopsylla simplex. Rabbit flea
Henne, Leptopsylla segnis Mouse flea
Femur Nosopsyllus fasciatus | Northern rat flea
“ia Diamanus mertanus — Geound squicrel flea
Tarsus Orchopeas howardii — Squitrel flea
Ceratophyllus nige Western hen flea

Fig. 43. Basic morphology of a flea.

40
Genatand pranotal
combs present

      

Pronetal comb
present

  
 

Ganslandgronci
combsabsént

1 Labi Labia ph r a
Tee souplecie re venctingnal =
Genal comb of Sts Getatcombot ¢pines centending beyond centending beyond headrounded ead angular
spines. Eyes fie Eyeabsemt twochenteroffeg rodyanterofieg ‘Thorax nota Thorexcoovacied
va
tages See amerié een
2 < aaa ne
sopsyis
peas
uitalaic?  sadamanerse
gcc | ecm
; 2 as
SE Weadrounded Head fat BY
ae ¢ ot) ee ey
: uae a
ee feurnegia  specttige om
eee ee rate ee
Sse he
= =e
cafocinatess; “minutes
ae ts

Fig, 44. Simplified key to the common fleas of animals and birds.

   

Fig. 45b. Cuterebra sp.

  
 

odeitt bot fly (Diptera).
i045 nim: Larvae are subcutaneous.

 
  

ay be fatal. Only lacvae infest mammals. Eggs, pupae, and adult flies at
host. Larvae are in host for 1-2 months.

  

a breathing’ hole, large light to dark-red laevae with d:
  

 

   
     
    
 
    
    
 
 
    

Sarcoptes scabiei

Fig. 46a. Life cycle of Sarcoptes scabiei (canis). The tite cy-

cle is 2-3 weeks. ed pedicels.

Sarcoptes scabiei

Conimon name: Mange mite (Sarcoptidae). Rare in cats; cats ustally have Notoedres cati.
__ Size of adult: 400-600 jum. Larvae (6 legs) and nymphs (8 legs) are smaller.
mpoctane ‘ause intense neling, ay and Hy chened skin that becomes crusty. Infestation a starts on head and spr

Fig. 47b. Demodex canis.

Importance: | - Areas of alopecia ‘bit head, neck, and for 5; pyodernta, praritus. Infection may be localized or generalized.
Diagnosis: Deep skin scraping wheit skin is cuseezed, Face and lips.are: Bet areas. Mites are in hair follicles and skin glands.
Treatment: Over 90% cure spontaneaiisly. Y

Amitraz (0.025%) dip every 2 weeks
Rotenone dip (1%)

Experimental:

 

Ailbemycin, 2 mg/kg q 24 h for at least 3 months. Ivermectin, up to 0.6 mg/kg q 24 h until resolved. Start at
0.1 mg/kg the first day, 0.2 the second day, etc. Treatments may last for several months.

42

  
Fig. 48b. Otodectes cynotis.

 

Fig. 48a. Life ¢yck of Osodectes cynotis.

Otodectes cyrotis

Coninion:name: Ear mite (Psoroptidae) of dogs and cats.
Size of adult: 500-800 um. Lifecycle is 18-21 days.
Importance; Intense pruritus of ear canal which may be followed by self-mutilation, otitis media, and bacterial infection.

Diagnosis: Viewing mites on otascopic examination oc on an eat swab. Mites can be seen ander a dissecting microscope or
placed on a slide ander a microscope (adults, nymphs, larvae, and eggs). Mites in the ear; occasionally on body.
Treatment: Use a ceruminolytic agent first to remove crusty debris.
Carbaryl, cythioate, pyrethrins, rotenone: use 1 deop per ear weekly for 4 weeks.
Ivermectin, 0.2-0.4 mg/kg PO, SC, or dilmed drop in the ear.
Selamectin, topically,

   
   

 

ife cycle ‘of Cheyletiella parasitovorax.

athion, pyc, pyrethroids, Treat host and enviconment.
week iver als

     
   

  
  
  
    

Section 3

 

oat Rhipicephalus sanguineus

FES <n?

Fig. 50a. Life cycle of Rbipicephalus sanguineus.

Fig. S0b. Rhipicephalus sanguineus.

   

Rhipicephalus sanguineus

 
     

Common name: Brown dog tick (Ixodidae).
© Size of aduh: 0.7-1.0 em. Life cycle is 6 weeks to 1 year
_Ampértance: Irritant, may cause anemia and tick paralysis when present in large numbers. Vector for canine babesiosis aii
Canine erlichiosis. Problem in dog kennels.
ist Three-host tick; all motile stages (larva, nymph, adult) can be on the dog or in the environment. Ticks are ont
dogs transiently to feed.

     
  

     
 

Fig. $1b. Babesia canis (arrows).

    

Fig. Sa. Life cyct

Babesia canis.

Common name: None (Apiconiple
Size of organism: 2-4 jam: Incubat
Importance: Hemolytic anemia, ‘depressi weight loss.

Diagnosis: Examination of a staine ‘ serology. Trophozoites are in red bload cells of dogs.
Treatment: Diminazene aceturate, 3.5 ng/kg IM.

Imidocarb dipropionate, 5 mg/kg oncé IM :
Phenamidine isothionate, 15 mgikg q 24h X24 SC

     
    
  

  

 
Protozoan Parasit

   
  
 
  
  
  
  

Neospora caninun

  

Commion name: Neospora caninion,
Stages in dogs: Tissue cyst (pseudocyst), tachyzoites, and oocysts.

Size of pseudocyst and oocysts < 100 pm (pseudocyst), 10-11 pm (oocyst). :
Importance: Transmitted transplacentally or orally. May cause ascending paralysis and rigid contrac

Lesions include necrosis, inflammation, encephalomyelitis, hepatitis, myocarditis, myo:
Diagnosis: Clinical signs and histologically.

Treatment: Drugs for the treatment or prevention of other coccidia may be helpful.
Note: Dogs are definitive hosts. Oocyts in dogs are 10-11 pm and sporulate in 3 days:

Bibliography (see pages 63-68)

45

 
Section 4

PARASITES OF CATS

Miscellaneous Parasites

 

a

5 | MISCELLANEOUS PROTOZOAN PARASITES
1

   
    
  

  

Babesia spp. Cytauxzoon sp.

Trypanosoma sp.
{intraerythrocytic } {intraerythrocytic}

{extraerythrocytic}

  

H. felis H. canis gametocyte schizont pseudocyst

Haemabartonella spp.

Hepatozoon canis Toxoplasma gondii
{epierythrocytic}

{intraleukocytic - gametocyte} {intracellular cyst}
{intramuscular- schizont [250 um])

iscellaneous protozoan parasites cletected in blood and tissues of dogs and eats. Note: Haenitobartonella spp. are

47

 
  
 

      
 
   

Miscellaneous External Parasites of Cats and Dogs

 

Fig. 52b. Broad head! of the clog-biting louse Trichodectes

; Fig. $2c. Unusual head of the cat-biting louse Felicola’ si
canis. :

ostratus.

Fig. $2e. Ornithonysstes sp. a rodent and bird mite occa-
sionally found on clogs and cats.

 

Fig. $2cl. Puewmonyssus canine, the nasal mite of dogs.

Fig. 52g. Another kind of larval chigger
sometimes found on «logs and cats.

   
us gramulosus (Cestoda) (2-3
tine of a dog or cat.

      

Fig. 52). Adult Nanophyetus saliincola (Trematoda) {1-2 ° ® '
aii) from the small intestine of a dog. Fig. $2k. Cross sections of Spirocerea tn
from the esophagus of a clog:

Fig. 521. Guathostoma sp. (Nematoda) epg fiom fecal
flotation of a cats: Adults:are’in the stomach’ of carnivores.

S eS Fig. $2m. Trichomonas (Tritrichomonas) sp. (Hagellated
protozoan) from the feces of a dog. Pathogenicity is un-
known.
    
   
 

Section 4

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts

Ss

 

RELATIVE SIZES
OF CAT PARASITE EGGS

Isospora fsospora
felis rivolta

42 x35pm 22 x 17pm

  

Toxocara cati
7 x 65pm

50um ® Dipylidium caninum
50ym Toxoplasma gondii egg 45 x 45yum
12x 10pm 1-63 eggs / packet

     

. Toxascaris leonina

. seatiets Taenia taeniaetormis Ancylostoma
BOxeBym Capillaria 37 x31 ym caninum

        

 

 

aerophila:: . 6Ox 40um

Fig. 53. Common parasite epgs and oacysts fad it cat feces.

50

 
Parasites of Cats

Location of Major Parasites

Ectoparasites

 

Parasites of Cats

Fleas - Ctenocephalides felis
Ctenocephalides canis

BRA CA Echidnophaga
YN Mt Teks - Uncommon
‘a 7 Le - Felicola subrostratus
Rc B Mites - Notoedres
we 4 Olodectes
LH Ki = Flies -Cuterebra spp, larvae
Dirolitaria immitis CODA
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus a « ; , 7
Capillaria aerophila A ' Capillaria sp

Olfutanus tricuspis Small Intestine

Physaloptera sp. Toxocara ati ; Taenia (Hydatigera} taeniaeformis
Gnathostoma sp. Toxascaris leonina Dipylidium caninum
Ancylostoma tubaeforme fsospora spp.
Uncinaria stenocephala Toxoplasma gondii

Echinococcus multilocularis

Fig. 54. Locations of the major parasites found in cats. Note: Trichuris spp. are very rare in cats. Heartworms are becoming
miore prevalent in cats (sce dogs). Titrichornonas foetus may cause large howel disease (Levy et al. 2003. f Parasitol 89:99
104)

 

51
Section 4

Zoonotic Diseases

ees

4 i Table 16. Major zoonotic diseases associated with cats

 

 

 

Organism Disease Method of Infection
Protozoa
Toxoplasma gondii oplasmosis Ingestion of oocysts

 

Trypanosoma crud

Nematodes
Ancylostoma spp.
Dirofilaria iniumitis
Lagocheilascaris minor
Strongyloides spp.
Gnathostoma spinigerum
Yoxocara cati

Trematodes
Paragonimus spp.

Cestodes
Dipylidiwn caninum
Echinococcus multilocularis
Pseuxlophyllidian tapeworms

Arthropods
Cheyletiella spp.
Sarcoptes scabiet
Notoedres cati

Trypanosomiasis

Cutaneous larva migrans
Dirofilasiasis
Lagacheilascariasis
Cutaneous larva migrans
Visceral larva migrans
Visceral larva migrans

Paragonimiasis

Dipylidiasis
Echinacnc

 

Sparganosis

Acariasis

 

Acariasis
Acariasis

Arthropod vector

Contact with larvae
Mosquito vector
Ingestion of larvated epgs
Contact with larvae
Ingestion of larvated eggs
Ingestion of larvated eges

Ingestion of metacercariace

Ingestion of cysticercoid from fleas
Ingestion of eggs
Ingestion or contact with larvae

Contact with infected cat
Contact with infected cat
Contact with infected cat

 

 

 

Toxoplasma sp.

Fig. $5a. Life

 

le of Toxoplasma gondii.

 

52

b. Coniparison of Toxoplasma with fsospora ooc:

TOXOPLASMA vs. ISOSPORA

 

SPORULATED

 
 

Drag

Bumamidine HCL
Dichlorophene
DichSorvos

Diethylcarbamazine

Disophenol
Dithiazanine

Epsiprantel
Febantel + praziquantel

+ pyrantel pamoate
Fenbendazole

Ivermectin

Mebendazale
Melarsomine
Methylbenzene +
dichlorophene
Metronidazole

Milbemycin oxime

Niclosamide
a-buty! chloride

Common Trade Name
Scolaban

Various

Task

Caricide/Filaribits

Various/DNP
Dizan

Cestex
Drontal Plus

Panacur

lvomec

Tyomec

Heartgard

‘Telmintic

Immidicide

Various

Flapy!

10-25 q I2hx Sd (cat)

Interceptor

Yomesan
Various

is often mixed with toluene

Piperazine

Praziquante!
Praziquantal + pyrantel
Pyrante! pamoate
Selamectin

Thenium clasylate +

 

 

Various

Droncit
Drontal
Nemex
Revolution

Various

fficacy of anthelmintics against major internal parasites of cats and dogs

Dose (ng/kg PO}

25-50
0
5-33

 

3.0-6.6 daily

25-100

7.5-10 2nd dose in two weeks)
20 q24hx 313d

5.5 (dogs) 2.8 (cats)
q 24h x 3d (dogs & cats)
Combination product

S0q24hx3d

0.05
0.006 (30-day intervals)
20 q24hx3-20d

2.5 mpikg IM, twice,
24 hours apart
200-275 mg/kg of each PO

25 q 12h x Sd (log)
0.5 (30-day intervals)

100 (dog), 200 (cat)
Read the label

100-250 (2nd close after 10
days), or 100-150.q 24h x2d

5-50

Combination product

15 (dog), 20-30 (cat)

6-12 (topi

 

S00q24hx1d
250q 24hx2d

Parasites of Cats

Parasites Susceptible

Cestades

Cestodes

Ascarids, hookworms,
whipworms

Heartworm prevention (14)

Ascarids

Hookworms

Miscellancous nematodes,
heartworm microfilariae

‘Tapeworms

‘Tapeworms

Ascarids, hookworms,
whipworms, tapeworms

Ascarids, hookworms,
Giardia, whipworms,
Taenia spp tapeworms

Whipworm, many other
nematodes

Heartworm microfilariac

Heartworm prevention.

Ascarids, hookworms,
whipworms

Adult heartworms

Ascarids, hookwerms,
cestodes
Giardia

Heartworm preventative,
hookwerms

Cestodes

Ascarids/hookworms

Ascarids

Cestades

Cestodes, ascarids, hookworms

Ascarids, hookworms

Heartworm prevention,
hookworms, ascarids (cats),
many arthrodpods

Hookworms, ascarids

Note: Read label directions carefully. The label is the most authoritative source of information (See Courtney and

Sundlof, 1991),

53

et
Section 4

 

Toxocara cati

Sig.

Fig. $6a. Toxocara caté prepatent period

 

 

50 days.

Ae Jeonina
Ss @.—-

Fig, $7a. Toxascaris leonina prepatent period is 74 days.

 

 

 

 

Ancylostoma tubaeformae

Waa 9S

Fig. 58a. Ancylostoma tibaeformae prepatent period is
22-25 days.

54

Internal Parasites
Toxocara cati

Common name: Ascarid or roundworm (Ascaridoidea),
Adult size: 4-12 cm in small intestine,

Size of egp: 75 jm x 65 jm.

mted growth, damage due to migrations
of larvae; possible cause of visceral larval migrans

 

 

Importance:

in humans.

is: ges in fecal flotation.

ent: Treat when eggs are detected.
Dichlarvos, 100 my/ky PO

Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24hx 3d
Mebendazole, 22 my/ky PO q 24x 5d
Piperazine, 100-200 myfky PO, repeat in 10 days
Pyrantel, 10-20 mg/kg PO

Selamectin, 7-13 mgfkg topically

 
 

Toxascaris leonina

Common Name: Asearid or roundworm (Ascaridoidea).

Adult size: 3-10 cm in small intestine.

Size of egy: 80 Jun x 70 jim.

Importance: Unthriftiness in kittens.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.

‘Treatment; Treat when eggs are detected.
Dichlorvos, 100 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mpfkg PO q24hx3d
Mebendazole, 22 my/ky PO q 24h x 5d
Piperazine, 100-200 my/ky PO, repeat in 10 days.
Pyrantel, 10-20 my/kg PO

 

   

Ancylostoma tubaeformae

Common name: Hookworm (Strongyloidea).
Adult size: 9-15 mm in small intestine.
Size of egg: 60 jun x 40 jum.
Importance: Interdigital dermatitis, pulmonary lesions in
heavy infestations, anemia, and poor hair coat.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
‘Treatment: Treat when eggs are detected.
Dichlorvos, 11 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 100 mp/ky PO or 50 mp q 24x 3d
Mebendazole, 25 mg/ky PO q 24 hx 3-5 d
Pyrantel, 20-30 my/ky PO
Sclamectin, 7-13 mpfky topically
Thenium closylate, 100-200 mgfky PO
Toluene, 0.22 me/ky PO

 
Parasites of Cats

    

Fig. $7b. Toxascaris leonina. Larvated eggs (left), normal
epg (right).

Fig. 57¢. Toxascaris leonina.

 
 

Section 4

 

Aelurostrongylus a

Fig. 39a. Aelurostrongylus abstrusus prepatent peciod is
5-6 weeks.

 

Gapillaria aerophila

eB

Fig. 60a. Capillaria aerophila prepatenc period is 40 days.

   

 

Paragonimus —_/

Fig. 61a. Paragonimus kellicotti prepatent period is 5~6
weeks.

56

Aelurostrongylus abstrusus

Common name: Cat hmgworm (Metastrongyloidea).
Adult size: 14-15 mm in hngs.
Importance: Chronic cough and weight loss, pulmonary
consolidation; may be fatal.
Diagnosis: Larvae in fecal flotation, eggs or larvae in
sputum.
‘Treatment: Fenbendazole, 20-50 mg/kg PO q 24h x
10d
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC
xid
Levamisole, 40 mg/kp PO q 48h x6 d

 

1 24hx3dorPOq 24h

Capillaria (Eucoleus) aevophila

Common name: Cat hingworm or bladderworm
(Trichuroidea}.

Adult size: 13-25 mum in hing (C. aerophila), C. plica
in bladder. C. (Ancliodzeca) pitorii in stomach,

Size of egg: 60 jum x 30 jum,

Importance: Relatively nonpathogenic; may catse
coughing (C. aerophita).

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation in urine sediment or
from bronchial swab.

‘Treatment: Fenbendazole, 100 mg/kp PO or SO mg/kg,
q24hx 10d

Paragonimus kellicotti

Conimon name: Lang fluke (Troglotrematidae).
Adult size: 8-10 mm in hgs.

Size of egg: 90 jim x 50 pm.

Importance: Chronic respiratory diseases.
Diagnosis

 

 

‘ggs in fecal flotation, sputum smear.
Treatment: Atbendazole, 50-100 mg/kg PO q 24 hx
14-21d
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24h x 10-14 d
Praziquantel, 25 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3d
sahyogeatt eS
bs Aslarostr 25)

    

ASSETS
LE

      

  

 

Fig, Ge. Paragonimmus kellicotti. Note
prominent opercuhum (arrows).

   
    
Section 4

 

Taenia taeniaeformis

CS

Fig. 63a. Taenia taeniaeformis prepatent period is 36-42
days.

 

Dipylidium caninum

 

Hig. 64a. Dipytidinm canimun peepatent period is |
month.

58

Spirometra sp.

Common name: Tapeworm (Taeniidae).

Adult size: 7-100 cm in small intestine.

Size of egg: 70 yin x 35 um.

Importance: May cause diarrhea, secondary anemia,

 

and sparganosis.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation, segments in feces.
Treatment: Bunamidine, 25-50 mg/kg, (600 mg maxi-
mum)
Praziquantel, 20-40 mg/kg PO or SC

Taenia taeniaeformis

Common name; Tapeworm (Taeniidae).

Adult size: 15-60 em in small intestine.

Size of egg: SO jum x 50 jm.

Importance: I Ieavy infection can cause diarrhea or in-
testinal obstruction.

Diagnosis: Segments (proglottids) in feces or on hairs in
perianal region, eggs in fecal flotation, single geni-
tal pore per proglottid.

Treatment: Bunamidine, 25-50 mg/kg PO or SC,
Epsiprantel, 2.8 mg/kg PO; Kenbendazole, 50
mefkg PO q 24 hx 3 ds Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg
PO q 24h 3-5 ck Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg PO;
Praziquamel, 2.5-5 mg/kg PO or SC

   

 

Dipylidiwn caninum

Common name: Hea tapeworm (Dilepididae).

Adult; In small intestine.

Size of egg: 25 jum x 30 ptm in oblong packets of 20 or
fewer eggs. Ege packets are 200 x 150 tm.

Importance: Indicates the presence of fleas. Chronic en-
teritis, anal pruritus, vomiting, or nervous disor-
ders may result.

Diagnosis: Segments on feces or perianal region, eggs in
fecal flotation, two genital pores per proglottid.

“freatment: Bunamidine, 25-50 mg/kg POs
Dichlorophene, 220 mg/kg PO; Epsiprantel, 2.8
mg/kg PO; Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO q 24 hx
3 dj Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg PO; Praziquantel,
25-5 mefkg PO or SC

 
Parasiti

   

Taenia taeniaeformis.

 

59
    

 

[ “—- @*  £)

Fig, 65a. Toxoplasma gondii Fig. 6$b. Toxoplasina gondii oocysts.

  
   
   
  
   
   
 
  
   
 
  
  
  

Toxoplasma gondii

Common name: Toxo (Apicomplexa), a protozoan parasite.
Size of oocyst: 12.5 yum x 11 pm in small intestine. Prepatent period is 3-10 days when tissue cysts are ingested and 18-4

days when oo¢yst$ are ingested. o
Importance: May: catise:transient diarrhea in cats; highly pathogenic to humans, especially the fetus in utero (first two!

trimesters}s patho peni¢ t6. ‘other animals.
Diagnosis Oocysis in fecal flotation, psetidocysts in tissues. Pseudocyst in dogs is similar to Neospora caninsm (see: Du

and Lindsay, 1993) Note: Only: ‘cats (Felidae) shed oocysts in feces.
Treatment: Sulfadiazine, 15-60 mike day divided into 4 doses and pyrimethamine 1 mgfkg q 24h x 3 d, then 0.5; to
24 h anti! oocyst shedding s Ops:
Clindarycin PO 8= Tmplky or 2 weeks.

 
 

 

   

Sarcocysitis sp.

®

 

 

Fig. 66a. Si ystis sp. -
OILS Fig. 66b. Sarcocystis sp. oocyst ands

sporocyst is one-half of the cdcyst:
Sarcocystis sp. s

Common name: None (Apicomplexa), a protozoan parasite.

Size of oocyst: 18 jum x 15 jam. Prepatent period is 8-33 days.

Importance: Not very pathogenic in cats, but can be pathogenic in sheep.

Diagnos
mediate hosts for S. ovifelis. Pseudocyst (schizont, sarcacyst) in sheep muscles, especial

Treatment: None needed.

Prevention: Do not feed cats raw meat.

 

Fecal flotation—see sporulated oocysts or sporocysts. Sporulated oocysts passed in ¢

60
Parasités:of; Cats

   
  

|) Isospora felis
oe

  
  
 

 
 

in kittens; may be fatal.
sin fecal flotation.

    
 
 
 
 

Giardia canis

Fig. 68b. Giardia sp. trophozvit
Fig. 68a. Giardia sp. 30b and 30c) :

wet
oh

Giardia canis

\ Common name; None (Mastigophora), a flagellated protozoan parasite.

 
 
  
 
  
  

in small and large intestine.
Importance: Diarrhea.

xclreatment: Furazotidane, 4 mg/kg PO q 12h x Sd
ii Metronidazole, 25 mg/kg PO q 12h x Sd
{Fenbetidazole, 50 mg/kg q 24h x 3d

beridazole, 25 mg/kg q 12hx2d

61
 

Section 4

External Parasites

Nofoedres cati

Common name: Mange mite (Sarcoptidae).
Size of adult: 300-400 jum. Life cycle is 17 days.
Importance: Persistent pruritus and alopecia on face, ears, and neck. Humans develop pruritic papular fas!

   
  
  
  
     

Diagnosis: Deep skin scraping at ede of lesion. Mites have long nonjointed pedicels like Sarcoptes. Adults,

vae, egys in clermal tissues.
Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg $C
Lime sulfur solution, 1:40 dip
Malathion, 0.5% dip

 

Notoedres cati

Fi, 69a. Notoedres cati.

 

= Sn oareNeaE a m
Fig. 69¢. Typical flea larva. Fig, 69d. Cenocepbalides felis (aduit female); Not
flea (atrows).

Table 18. Common external parasites of cats

Cheyletiella blakeilparasitovorax (See Fig. 49)

Ctenocephalides felistcanis (See Figs. 42, 69c, 69d)
Cuterebra spp. (See Fig. 45)

Demodex cati (See Fig. 47; very care in cats)

(From birds, see Fig. 195)
(Larval chiggers, see Figs. S2£and'52p)
(See Fig. S2c) :
(Very rare)

Ornithonyssus sp. (From rodents and birds; See Fi
Otodectes cynotis (See Fig. 48) :
Rbipicephalus sanguinens (See Fig. 50)
Sarcoptes scabiei (Sce Fig. 46; umconinion in cats

Dermanyssus gallinae
Eutrombicula alfreddugesi
Felicola subrostratus

 
 
  
 
 

  
  
   

Lynsacarus radousky

62
Bibliography

Ascarids aud Hookworns

 

Blaghurn BL, Hendrix CM, Lindsay DS, et al.: Efficacy
of milbenmycin oxime against naturally acquired or
experimentally induced Ancylostoma spp. and

-huris mulpis infections in dogs. Am J Vet Res

3 13-516, 1992.

Burke TM, Roberson EL: Fenbendazole treatment of
pregnant bitches to reduce parental and lactogenic
infections of Toxocara canis and Ancylostoma can-
imun in pups, J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:987-990,
1983.

Barke TM, Roberson E!

peara canis and Ancylostoma

  

  

Prenatal and Jactational

 

  

transmission of Tos
canintnn: Experimental infection of the hitch before
pregnancy, Jat J Parasitol 15:71-75, 1985,

Barke TM, Roberson Prenatal and lactational
transmission of ‘Toxocara canis and Ancylostoma
canimon: Experimental infection of the bitch at mid

 

 

pregnancy and at parturition. fat J Parasitol
15:485-S90, 1985,

Clapham PA: Pre-partum infestation of puppies with
Ancylostoma caninum. Vet Rec 74:754-755, 1962.

Cornelius LM, Roberson EL: Treatment of gastroin-
testinal parasitism. In Kirk RW (ed}: Current
Veterinary Therapy IX: Smtall Animal Practice,
Philadelphia, WB Saunders Co., 1986, pp 921-924.

Courtney CL, Sundlof SF: Veterinary Parasitic Drugs
1991, American Association of Veterinary
Parasitologists, A comprehensive compendium of
EDA-approved antiparasitic drugs, Publ $P96,
University of Florida, 224 pages, 1991.

Dubey JP: Effect of fenhendazole on Toxocara canis
larvae in tissues of infected days. Am J Vet Res
40:698~699, 1979.

Egerton JR, Eary CH, Suhayda PD: Titration studies of
ivermectin against experimental Aneylostoma can-
imon and Uncinaria stenocephala infections. Am J
Vet Res 46:1057-1059, 1985,

Georgi JR, Lejamhre LE, Ratcliffe LH: Ancylostoma
canintni burden in relationship to erythrocyte loss
in dogs. J Parasitol $5:1205-1211, 1969.

Hayes FA, McDaniel HT: An evaluation of piperazine
citrate for preventing prenatal infections with the
common dog ascarid (Toxocara canis). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 134:565-567, 1959.

Kirkpartrick CE, Megella C: Use of ivermectin in treat-
ment of Aelurostrongyhts abstrusus and Toxocara
cati infections in a cat. J Ani Vet Med Assoe
190;1309-1310, 1987.

Mark DL: Survival of Ancylostoma caninin on bare
ground, pea gravel, and concrete, Anz J Vet Res

 

63

Parasites of Cats

36:1803-1807, 1975,

Marmor M, Glickman L, Shoffer F, et a
nis infection of children: Epidemiologic and neu-
ropsy'chologic findings. Az J Public Health
7754-559, 1987.

McTier TL, Shanks DJ, Wren JA, et al.
safety of selamectin against experimentally
and naturally acquired infections of Toxucgra cat
and Ancytostoma tubaeforme in cats. Vet Parasitol
94:3 11-319, 2000.

McTier TL, Siedek E. mence RG, et al. cy
of selamectin against experimentally induced and

arid (Toxveara canis and

   

Toxotare ca-

   

induced

 

   

 

naturally occurring as
Toxascaris leanina) infections in dogs. Vet Parasitol
9 345, 2000.

Niamatali $, Bhopale V, Schad GA: EI
mycin oxime against experimentally induced
Ancytostoma stenocephata infections of dogs. f An
Vet Med Assoc 201:1385-1387, 1992.

Payne-Johnson M, Maitland ‘TP, Sherington ,
Efficacy of selamectin administered topically to preg-
nant and lactating female dogs in the treatment :
prevention of adult roundworm (fu
fections and flea (Ctenocepbatides jelis felis) infesta-
tions in the dams and the pups. Vet Parasitol
91:347-358, 2000.

Schacher JF: A contribution to the life history and lar-
yal morphology of Toxucara canis, | Parasitol
43:599-6 12, 1957.

Scothorn MW, Koutz FR, Groves HF: Prenatal
‘Toxocara canis infection in pups. J Aim Vet Med
Assve 145:45-48, 1965,

Six RE, Sture GH, Thomas CA, et Fificacy
safety of selamectin against gastrointestinal nenta-
todes in cats presented as veterinary patients. Vet

Parasitol 91:321-331, 2000.

Sprent JEA: The life history and development of
Toxocara cati (Schrank 1788) in the domestic cat.
Parasitology 46:54-78, 1956.

Sprent JFA: Post-parturient infection of the hitch with
Tuxocara canis. } Parasitol 47:284, 1961.

Vinayak VK, Gupta NK, Chopra AK, et
of vaccines against canine hookworm disease.
Parasitology 82:375-382, 1981.

 
   

acy of milhe-

 

  

  

  

 

 

 

  

and

 

=

 

 

 

 

 

Heartiworms

Atkins CE, DeFrancesco TC, Coats JR, Sidley JA,
Keene BW Heartworm infection in cats: SO cases
(1985-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:
2000.

Barman PM, Otto GF: The relative number of microti-
lariae of Dirofilaria imunitis and Dipetatonema re-
conditum in naturally infected dogs. J Am Anim

 

C1
xt I.

Section 4

Hosp Assoc 10:379-382, 1974.

Blair LS, Camphell WC: Efficacy of ivermectin against
Dirofilaria immitis larvae in dogs 31, 60, and 90
lays after infection. Ant} Vet Res 41:2108, 1980.

Blair 1.5, Malatesta PL, Ewanciw DV: Dose-response
study of ivermectin against Dirofilaria immitis mi-

 

 

   

crofilariae in dogs with naturally acquired infections.
Am J} Vet Res 44:476-477, 1983.

Boy MG, Six RH, Thomas CA, et al.: Efficacy and
safety of selanectin against fleas and heartworms in
clogs and cats presented as veterinary patients in
North America. Ver Parasitol 91:233-250, 2000.

Christensen BM, Hollander AL: Effect of tentperature

   

on vector-parasite relationships of Aedes trivitatins
and Darofilaria inamitis. Proceedings of the
Ilelminthological Society of Washington

45:1 15-119, 1978.

Church EM, Georgi JR, Robson DS: Analysis of the
microfilarial periodicity of Dirofilaria ianmitis,
Cornell Vet 55:333-346, 1976.

Grieve RB, Glickman LT, Bater AK, et al: C.
Dirofilaria immitis infection in a hyperenzootic area:
Examination by parasitologic findings at necropsy
and by serodiagnostic methods. Ami J Vet Res
47:329-332, 1986.

Holmes RA; Feline heartworm clisease. Small Animal
Parasitology 15:687-695, 1993.

Jackson RF: Surgical treatment of heartworm clisease. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 154:383-384, 1969.

Kotani T, Powers KG: Developmental stages of
Dirofilaria immitis in the doy. Ant | Vet Res
43:2199-2206, 1982.

Lewis RE.
In Otto GE (ed): Proceedings of the Heartworm
Symposinn °86. Washington, DC, American
Heartworm Society, 1986, pp. 1

MeCall JW, McTier TL, Ryan WG, et a
ivermectin and milhemycin oxime efficacy against
Dirofilaria immitis infections of three or four
months’ curation in clogs. Ai } Vet Res
57:1189-1192, 1996.

MeTier TL, Shanks DJ, Watston P, et al: Prevention of
experimentally induced heartworm (Dirofilaria in-
ani

 

 

 

amine

 

Radiographic findings in feline dirofilariasis.

  

aluation of

 

infection in dogs and cats with a single topical
application of selamectin. Vet Parasitol 91:259-268,
2000.

Merrill JR, Otis J, Logan WD, et al.: The dog heart-
worm (Dirofilaria immitis) in man. } Ani Med Assoc
243:1066-1068, 1980.

Otto GE, Jachowski LA; Mosquitoes and canine heart-

In Otto GE (ed): Proceedings of the

Heartworm Symposium ‘80, Edwardsville, Kansas,

Veterinary Medicine Publishing Co., 1981, pp.

17-32.

 

worm cisease.

   

64

Otto GE, Jackson RE, Bauman PM, et al: Va
the ratio between the aumbers of microfil
adult heartworms. } Ani Vet Med Assoc
168:605-607, 1976.

Paul AJ, Todd KS, Sundbery JP, et ali: Efficacy of iver-
mectin against Dirofilaria immitis larvae in dogs 30

riability in
jariae and

 

and 45 days after induced infection. Am J Vet Res
47:883-884, 1986.

Pulliam JD, Seward RD, Henry RT, et al.: Investigating
ivermectin toxicity in collies. Vet Med 6:33-40,
1985.

Snyder PS, Levy JK, Salute ME, et al Performance of
serologic tests used to detect heartworm infection in
cats. f An: Vet Med Assoc 216:693-700, 2000.

‘Taylor AER: The development of Dirofilaria immitis in
the mosquito Aedes aegypti. | Helminthol 34:27-38,
1960.

Whiteley HE: Your diagnostic protocol for Dirofilaria
inonitis infection in dogs. Vet Med 8:328-345, 1988.

 

 

Miscellaneous Parasites and Drugs in Dogs and
Cats

 

Anderson DL, Roberson Activity of ivermectin
against canine intestinal helminths. Am f Vet Res
43:1681-1683, 1982,

Anderson FL, Condor GA, Marsland WP; Efficacy of
injectable and tablet formulations of praziquantel
against mature Echinococcus gramdosus. Am | Vet
Res 39:1861-1862; 15:256-260, 1978.

Anderson WI, Georgi ME, Car BD: Pancreatic atrophy
and fibrosis associated with Eurytrema procyonis in
a domestic cat. Vet Ree 120: 236, 1987,

August JR, Powers RD, Bailey WS, et al.: Filaroides
birthi in a dog: Fatal hyperinfection suggestive of an-
toinfection, | Anz Vet Med Assoc 176:33 1-334,
1980.

Baner C, Gey Ar
luminal stages of Baylisascaris procyonis in naturally
infected raccoons {Procyon lotor). Vet Parasitol
60:155-159, 1995.

Beal MW, Poppenga RH, Birdsall WJ, Hughes D:
Respiratory failure attributable to moxidectin intoxi-
cation in a dog. | An: Vet Med Assoc 215:1813-
1817, 1999.

Blagburn BL, Hendrix CM, Lindsay DS, Vanghan JL
Anthelminthie efficacy of ivermectin in naturally
parasitized cats. An} Vet Res 48:670-672, 1987,

Bowman DD, Frongillo MK, Johnson RC, et al:
Evaluation of praziquantel for treatment of experi-

 

 

acy of six anthelmintics apainst

mentally induced paragonimiasis in dogs and cats.
Am ] Vet Res 52:68-71, 1991.

Burke TM, Roberson EL: Critical studies of fenbenda-
zole suspension (10%) against naturally occurring
helminth infections in dogs. Am J Vet Res
39;987-990, 1983.

Burke TM, Roberson EL: Use of fenbendazole suspen-
sion (10%) against experimental infections of
‘Toxocara canis andl Ancytostoma caninunt in beagle
pups, Anz J Vet Res 40:552-554, 1979,

Campbell WC (ed): Juermectin and Abamectin. New
York, Springer-Verlag, 1989,

Clarkson MJ, Owen LN: The species of Trichievis in the
dlomestic cat. f Helminthol 34:319-322, 1960.

Corwin RM, Pratt SE, McCurdy HD: Anthelmintic ef-
fect of febantel/praziquantel paste in dogs and cats.
Am } Vet Res 45:154-155, 1984.

Corwin RM, Green SP, Keefe T]: Dose titration and
confirmation tests for determination of cesticidal ef-
ficacy of epsiprantel in dogs. Amn J Vet Res
50:1076-1077, 1989.

Dubey JP, Miller TB, Sharma SP; Fenbendazole for
treatment of Paragonimus kellicotti infection in
dogs. f An Ver Med Assoc 174:835-837, 1979.

Dunsmore JD, Spratt DM: The life history of Filaroides
osteri in wild and domestic canids in Australia, Ver
Parasitol 5:275-286, 1979.

Foreyt WJ, Gorham JR: Evaluation of praziquantel
against induced Nanopbyetus salmincola infections
in coyotes and dogs. Anz } Vet Res 49:563-S65,
1988.

Fox $M, Burns J, Hawkins J: Spirocercosis in dogs.
Compend Cont Fd 10:807-822, 1988.

Georgi JR, Georgi ME, Gahnestock GR, et al
Transmission and control of Filuroides birthi lang:
worm infection in dogs. Av f Vet Res 40:829-831,
1979.

Hargis AM, Prieur DJ, Blanchard JL: Prevalence, le-
sions and differential diagnosis of Ollulanus trictts-
pis infection in cats, Vet Pathol 20:71-79, 1983.

Hollins JD, Marlow BP, Hatherell PJ: Ingestion of
equine moxidectin in dogs. Ver Ree 147:227-228,
2000.

Kirkpatrick CE, Shelly EA: Paragonimiasis in a dog:
Treatment with praziquantel, f Am Vet Med Assoc
187:75-76, 1985.

Lynn RC: Antiparasitic drugs. In Bowman DD ed):
Georgis' Parastiology fur Veterinarians. 7 edition,
Philadelphia, WB, Saunders Co., 1999, pp. 235-
283.

Paul AJ, Tranquilli W], Hutchens DE: Safety of mox-
idectin in avermectin-sensitive collies, Avi J Fet Res
6 1:428-483, 2000,

Poole JB, Dooley KL, Rollins LD: Efficacy of
niclosamide for the removal of tapeworms
(Dipylidian caninum and Taenia pisiformis) from
dogs, JAVMA 159:78-80, 1971,

Reinemeyer CR, DeNovo RC: Evaluation of the effica-

 

 

 

 

  

 

  

65

Parasites of Cats

cy and safety of nwo formulations of pyrantel
pamoate in cats. Am } Vet Res 51:932-934, 1990.

Roberson EL, Burke TM: Evaluation of a granulated
fenbendazole (22.2%) against induced and naturally
occuring helminth infections in cats. Av J Vet Res
41:149-1502, 1980.

Roberson EL, Burke TM: Evaluation of granulated fen-
bendazole as a treatment for hebninth infections in
clogs. J An Vet Med Assoc 180:53-55, 1982.

Stokol T, Randolph Jl, Nachbar S, et al: Development
of bone marrow toxicosis after albendazole adminis-
tration in a dog and cat, f Am Vet Med Assoc
210:1753-1756, 1997,

‘Thomas H, Gonnert R: The efficacy of praziquantel
against cestocks in cats dogs, and sheep. Res Vet Sei
24;20-25, 1978.

Verster A: A taxonomic revision of the genus Taenia
(Linnaeus, 1758). Onderstepuort J Vet Res 363-58,
1969.

Visco RJ, Corwin RM, Selby LA: Effect of age and sex
on the prevalence of intestinal parasitism in dogs. f
Am Vet Med Assoc 170:835-837, 1977.

Yazwinski TA, Tilley W. Greenway
mectin in the treatment of artificially induced camine,
mixed, gastrointestinal helminthiasis, Vet Med Sara!
Anint Clin 77:225-226, 1982.

 

   

 

  

 

Efficacy of iver-

Protozoan Parasites

Abbitt B, Huey RL, Eugster AK, et at: Treatment of gi-
ardiasis in adult greyhounds using ipronidazole-med-
icated water, f Ant Vet Mect Assoc 188:67-69, 1986.

Abdullahi SU, Sannusi A; Canine babesiosis. In Kirk
RW (eal): Veterinary Therapy IX. Sutall Anitaul
Practice. Philadelphia, W.B. 1986, pp.
1096-1098.

Barr SC: American trypanosomiasis in dogs. Comps
Cont Fdue Pract Vet 13:745-755, 1991.

Barr SC, Bowman DD, Heller RL, Erb, HN.
albendazole against giardiasis in dogs. Am J Vet Res
54:926-928, 1993.

C, Bowman DD, Heller RI
dazole against giardiasis in dogs. Proc Aim Assoc Vet
Parasitol San Francisco, California, 1994.

Bemrick WJ: Some perspectives on the transmission of
giardiasis, In Erlandsen SL, Meyer EA (eds: Giardia
and Giardiasis: Biology, Patho genesis, and
Epidemiology. New York, Plenum Press, (984, pp.
379-400.

Benjamin MM, Lumb WV: Haemobartonella canis in-
fection in a dog. J Ant Vet Med Assoc 13. 8390,

1959.

Bennett M, Baxby D, Blundell N, et al.
sis in the domestic cat, Vet Ree 116;

 

 

Saunders Co,

  

 

 

   

‘fficacy of fenben-

 

  

 

 

yprosporidio-
73-74, 1985,

 

et
ad
tt.

Section 4

Kocan AA, Glen BL, et al.: Transmission of
Cytanxzoon felis (Kier, 1979) from bobeats, Felix
rufus (Schreber), to comestic cats by Dermacentor
variahilis Say). | Wild! Dis 20:241-242, 1984.

Breitschwerdt Babesiosis. In Greene CE (edt):
Infections Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1990, pp. 796-803.

Craig TM: Elepatozoonosis. In Greene CE (ed):
Infections Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1990, pp. 778-785.

Dubey JP: A review of Sarcocystis of domestic animals
and other coccidia of cats and dogs. J Ant Vet Med
Assoe 169:1061-1078, 1976

Dubey JP: Infectivity and pathogenicity of Tovoplasi
gondii for cats. | Parasitol 57-961, 1996.

Dubey JP; Reshedding of Toxoplasma oocysts by
chronically infected cats, Nature 262:2 13-314,
1976.

Dubey JP: Toxoplasma, Hammondia, Besnoitia
Sareoeystis, anc other tissue cyst-forming co:
man and animals. In Kreir JP (eds): Parasitic
Protozoa. Volume 3. New York, Academic Press,
1977, pp. 101-237.

Dubey JP: Pathogenicity of Isospora obioensis infection
in cogs. | An: Vet Med Assoe 173:192-197, 1978.

Dubey JP Beattie CP: Toxoplasmosis of animals and
nian. Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press, Inc., 1988.

Dubey JP, Carpenter JL, Speer CA, et al.: Newly recog-
nized fatal protozoan disease of dogs. f Am Vet Med
Assoe 192:1269-1285, 1988.

Dubey Enteric coe
(ed): Infections Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1990, pp. 835-846.

Dubey JP, Greene CE, Lappin MR: Toxoplasmosis and
Neosporosis. In Greene CE (ed): Iufections Diseases
of the Dog and Gut. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders
Co., 1990, pp. $18-834.

Dubey JP, Hartel AL, Lindsay DS, et al.: Neonatal
Neospora caninum infection in dogs: Isolation of the
causative agent and experimental transmission. { Ar
Vet Med Assoe 193: 1259-1263, 1988.

Dubey JP, Lindsay DS: Neosporosis. Parasitol Today
9:452-457, 1993.

Dubey JP, Speer CA, Fayer R: Sareocystosis of Animals
and Man. Boea Raton, Florida, CRC Press, Inc.,
1989.

Dunbar MR, Foreyt WJ: Prevention of coccidiosis in
domestic dogs and captive coyotes (Canis latrans)
with sulfadimethoxine-ormetoprin combination. Avr
J Vet Res 46:1899-1902, 1985,

Farwell GE, LeGrand EK, Cobb CC
tions on Babesia gibsoni and Babesia canis infec-
tions in dogs. f Avr Vet Med Assoc 180:507-511,
1982.

 

 

 

 

 

  

cidia of

 

  

 

 

 

P, Greene josis, In Greene CE

 

 

 

nical observa-

 

66

 

yer R, Ungar BLP: Cryptosporidinn spp. and eryp-
tosporitiosis. Microbiol Rev S0:AS8-483, 1986.

Frenkel JK, Dubey JP: Rodents as vectors for feline
coccidia, Isospora felis and Isospora rivolta. J Infect
Dis 125:69-'

Frenkel JK, Smith DD:
on shedding of To:
Parasitol 68:85 1-1

Glenn BL., Stair EL:
Report of two eases in Oklahoma, with a review
and discussion of the disease. f Air Vet Med Assoc
18. 1984.

Gookin JL, Riviere JE, Gilger BC, Papich MG: Acute
renal failure in four cats treated with paromomyicn.
J Am Vet Med Assoe 215:1821-1823, 1999.

Harvey JW Haemobartonellosis. In Greene CE (ect:
Infections Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders Co. 1990, pp. 434-442.

Hay WH, Shell LG, Lindsay DS, Dubey JP: Diagnosis
and treatment of Neospora caninum infection of a
clog. } Amt Vet Med Assoc 197:87-89, 1990,

Hill SL, Cheney JM, Taton-Allen GF, Reif JS, Bruns C,
Lappin MR; Prevalence of enterie zoonotic organ-
isms in cats, } An Vet Med Assoc 216:687-692,
2000.

Kier AB: Cytauxzoonosis. In Greene CE (ed): Infectious
Diseases of the Dog and Cat. Philadelphia, WB
Saunders Co., 1990, pp. 792-795.

Kirkpatrick CE: Enteric protozoal infections. In Greene
CE (ed): Infections Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1990, pp. 804-814.

Kirkpatrick CE, Dubey JP, Goklschmidt MH, et al.:
Sarcocystis sp. in muscles of domestic cats. Vet
Pathol 23:88-90, 1986.

Kirkpatrick CE, Green Ga, IV: Susceptibility of domes-
tic cats to infections with Giardia lamblia cysts and
trophozoites from human sources. | Clin Microbiol
21:678-680, 1985.

Kirkpatrick CE, Laczak JP: Giartiasis in a cattery. J
Am Vet Med Assoe 187: 161-162, 1985.

Levine ND, lvens V: The coceidian parasites (Protozoc,
Apicomplexa) of carnivores, Mlinois Biology
Monograph no. 54, Urbana, University of Illinois
Press, 1981.

Lindsay DS, Blagburn BL: Coccidial parasites of cats
and cogs. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet
13:759-765:1991,

Lindsay DS, Dubey JP, Duncan RB: Confirmation that
the dog is a elefinitive host for Neospora cavtinun.
Vet Parasitol 82:327,

Olson ME: Coccittiosis caused by Isospora objvensis-
like organisms in three clogs. Can Vet f 26:112-114,
1985.

Olson ME, Ceri H, Morck DW: Giardia vaccination.

 

 

  
  
 

nhibitory effects of monensin
pplasma oocysts by cats.

7 1982,

Cytauxzoonosis in domestic cats:

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

  

 
Parasitol Today 16:213-217, 2000.

Pins RP, Twedt DC, Mallie KA: Comparison of duoce-
nal aspiration with fecal flotation for diagnosis of gi-
artiasis in dogs. f Am Ver Med Assoc
182:1210-1211, 1983.

Prestwood AK: Cryptosporidiosis. In Greene CE (edt):
Infections Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
Philacelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1990, pp. $47

Roher DP, Ancterson JE, Nielsen SW: Experimental
babesiosis in coyotes and coydogs. Ai J Vet Res
46:256-262, 1985.

Small E, Ristic M: Haemobartonellosis. In [olaworth J
(ed: Diseases of the Cat: Medicine and Surgery.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1987, pp. 301-308.

Smart J: Amprolium for canine coccidiosis. Med Vet
Pract 52:41, 1971.

Swenson CL, Silverman J, Stromberg PC, et al.:
Visceral leishmaniasis in an English foxhound from
an Ohio research colony. | Am Vet Med Assoc
193:1089-1092, 1988.

Taboata J, Harvey JW, Levy MG, et al: Seroprevalence
of babesiosis in greyhounds in Florida. f Am Vet
Med Assoc 200:47-50, 1992.

Upton SJ, Current WL: The species of Cryptosporidinn
(Apicomplexa: Cryptosporidiidae) infecting mam-
mals. } Parasitol 71:625-629, 1985.

Woo PTK, Paterson WB: Giardia lamblia in children in
cay care centres in southern Ontario, Canada, and
susceptibility of animals to G. famblia. Trans R Soc
Trop Med Hyg $0:56-59, 1986.

Zajac AM: Giartiasis. Compend Continuing Ed
14:604-6 11, 1992.

 

 

 

Fleas

 

Arther RG, Cunningham }, Dorn H, et al: Efficacy of
imicacloprid for removal and control of fleas
(Ctenocephalides felis) on dogs. Am | Vet Res
38:848~850, 1997.

Baker NE, Farver TB: Failure of brewer's yeast as a re-
pellant to fleas on cogs. J Ant Vet Med Assoc
183:212-214, 1983.

Benton AH: Av Atlas of the Fleas of the Eastern United
States. Fredonia, New York, Marginal Media, 1980.

Blagburn BL, Vaughan J, Lindsay DS, et al Efficacy
dosage titration of Iufenuron against developmental
stages of fleas (Ctenocephlides felis felis) in cats. Am
J Vet Res 55:98-101, 1994.

Cunningham J, Everett R: Efficacy of imidacloprid on
large clogs. Comp Cont Edue Pract Vet 19:28, 1997.

Dryden MW, Long GR, Gaafar $M: Effects of ultrason-
ic collars on Ctenocephatides felis on cats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 195:1717-1718, 1989,

Halliwell REW: Factors in the clevelopment of flea-bite

 

 

 

67

Parasites of Cats

allergy. Ver Med Surafl Anim Clin 79:1273-1278,
1984.

Hink WE, Eee BJ: Toxicity of d4.imonene, the major
component of citrus peel oil, to all life stages of the
cat tlea, Crenocephalides felis (Siphonoptera:
Pulicidae). f Med Entomol 23:400-404, 1986,

MacDonald JM, Miller A: Parasiticide therapy in
small animal dermatology. In Kirk RW (ed): Current
Veterinary Therapy 1X. Philadelphia, W.B. Samders
Co., 1986.

Mcllier TL, Shanks DJ, Jernigan AD: Evaluation of the
effects of selamectin against adult and immature
stages of fleas (Ctenocepbatides felis felis) on dogs
and cats. Vet Parasitol 91:201-212, 2000.

Ritzhaupt LK, Rowan TG, Jones RI: Evaluation of ef-
ficacy of sclamcetin, fipronil, and imidacloprid
against Ctenocepbalides felis in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 217:1669~1671, 2000.

Ritzhaupt LK, Rowan TG, Jones RL: Evaluation of ef-
ficacy of selamectin and fipronil against
Ctenocephatides felis in cats. f Am Vet Med Assoc
217:1666~-1668, 2000.

Shanks DJ, Rowan TG, Jones RI: Efficacy of se-
lamectin in the treatment ancl prevention of flea
{Ctenocepbalides felis felis) infestations on dogs and
cats housed in simulated home environment. Vet
Parasitol 91:21 3-222, 2000.

 

  

Mites

Alexander MM, Ihrke P}: Cheyletietla dermatitis in
A review. Calif Ver

 

small animal prac
36(3):9-12, 1982.

Alrian 1G, Morgan MS, Rapp CML, Vyszenski-Moher
DI: Some effects of sarcoptic mange on clogs. f
Parasitol $1:698-702, 1995.

Auger P, Nantel J, Meunier N, et al: Skin acariasis
caused by Dermanyssus gallinae de Geer: An in-hos-
pital outbreak. Cart Med Assoc J 120:700--703,
1979,

Batey RG, Thompson RCA: Demodectic mange ina
cat. Aust Vet | 57:49, 1981,

Bowman DD, Fogelson ML, Carbone LG: Effect of
ivermectin on the control of ear mites (Psoropies ex-
niczdi) in naturally infested rabbits. J Amt Vet Med
Assoc 53:105-109, 1992.

Cannon RW: Amitraz in treatment of canine ctemodico-
sis. Mod Vet Pract 64:899-900, 1983,

Folz SD: Demodicosis (Demodex canis). Compend
Continuing Ed 5:116~-124, 1983.

Folz SD, Kakuk TJ, Henke CL, et al.: CHnical evalua-
tion of amitraz as a treatment for canine demoxico-
sis. Vet Parasitol 16:335-341, 1984.

Folz SD, Kakuk TJ, Henke CL, et al.: Clinical evalua-

 

 

UX
tL

Section 4

 

tion of amitraz for treatment of canine scabies. Mod
Vet Pract 65:597-600, 1984.
Greve JH, Gerrish RR: Fur mites (Lynxacarus) from
cats in Florida, Feline Pract 11(6):28-30, 1981.
Hatchinson MD, Jacobs DE, Fox M'f, et al:
Evaluation of flea control strategies using fipronil on

 

 

   

cats in a controlled simulated home environment.
Vet Ree 142:3. 1998,

Kunkle GA, Miller WH: Cheyfetiella infestation in hu-
mans. Aref) Dermatol 115: 1345, 1980.

Kwochka KW: Canine demodicosis. In Kirk RW (ed):
Current Veterinary Therapy IX, Philadelphia, WB.
Saunders Co., 1986.

MacDonald JM: Eetoparasites. In Kirk RW (ed):
Current Veterinary Therapy VL. Philadelphia, W.B.
Saunders Co., 1983.

Miller WH, Scott DW, Wellington JR, et al.: Clinical ef-
ficacy of milbeniycin oxime in the treatment of gen-
eralized cemodicosis in adult dogs. | Ar Ver Med
Asse 204:1426-1429, 1993,

Nuttall TJ, French AT, Cheetham HC, et al: ‘Treatment
of Trombicula autunmatis infestation in cogs and
cats with a 0.25 percent fipronil pump spray. | Small
Anim Pract 39:237-239, 1998.

Paradis M: New approaches to the treatment of canine
demacicosis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
29:1425-1436, 1999.

Scheidt VJ, Medleau L, Seward RL, et al: An evalua-
tion of ivermectin in the treatment of sarcoptic
mange in dogs. Av } Vet Res 45:1201-1202, 1984,

Scott DW, Walton DK: Experiences with the use of
amitraz and ivermectin for the treatment of general-
ized cemodicosis in dogs. J Avr Anim Hosp Assoc
21:535-S41, 1985,

Shanks DJ, McTier TL, Rowan TG, et al.: The efficacy
of selamectin in the treatment of naturally acquired

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

aural infestations of Orodectes cynotis on dogs and
cats. Vet Parasitol 91:283-290, 2000.

Shaw SE, Foster AP: Treatment of canine adult-onset
demodicosis, Aust Vet { 78:243-244, 2000.

Shelley ED, Shelley WB, Pala JE, et als The diagnostic
challenge of non-bur rowing mite bites Cheyletictla
yasguri. | Aut Med Assoc 251:2690-2691, 1984,

Shipstone M1: Generalised cemocicosis in clogs, clinical
perspective. Aust Ver J 78:240-242, 2000.

Six R, Clemence RG, ‘Thomas CA, et al.: Efficacy and
safety of selamectin against Sarcoptes scabiei on

68

dogs and Otodectes cynotis on dogs and cats pre-
sented as veterinary patients. Vet Parasitol
91:291-309, 2000.

Wagner R, WendIberger U: Field efficacy of moxidectin
in dogs and rabbits naturally infested by Sacroptes
spp. Demodex spp., and Psoroptes spp. mites. Vet
Parasitol 93:149-158, 2000.

White SID, Stannard AA: Canine demodicosis. In Kirk
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VII.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co, 198.

Yazwinski TA, Pote L, ‘Tilley W, et a cacy of iver-
meetin against Sarcoptes scabiei and Otodectes
eynotis infestations of dogs. Vet Med Small Auint
Clin 76:1749-1751, 1981.

    

  

Ticks

Anderson JE: Epizootiology of Borrelia in Ixodes tick
vectors and reservoir hosts. Ree Infect Dis H (Suppl
6):1451-1459, 1989,

Appel, MIG: Lyme disease in logs and cats. Compend
Continuing Education 12:617-626, 1990.

Bowman DD, Giovengo SL: Identification of adult anc
nymphal ticks. Ver Tech 12:505-509, 1991,

Eng TR, Wilson ML, Spielman A, et al: Greater risk of
Borrelia burgdorferi infection in dogs than in peo-
ple. f Infect Dis 158:1410-1411, 1988.

Estracda-Pena A, Ascher F: Comparison of an amitraz-

 

 

  

impregnated collar with topical administration of
fipronil for prevention of experimental and natural
infestations by the brown dog tick (Rhipicephatus
sangutineus). | Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1799-17803,
1999,

Jernigan AD, McTier TL, Chieffo C, et al: Efficacy of
selamectin against experimentally induced tick

 

(Rhipicephalus sanguineus and Dermacentor vari-
abilis) infestations on dogs. Vet Parasitol
9 9-375, 2000.

Magnarelli LA, Anderson JF: Ticks and biting insects
infected with the etiologic agent of Lyme disease,
Borrelia burgdorferi. | Clin Microbiol
26:1482-1486, 1988,

Spielman A, Clifford CM, Piesman J, Corwin MD:
Human babesiosis on Nantucket Island, USA:
Description of vector Ixodes damunini. | Med
Entomol 15:218-232, 1979,

    
 
   

Section 5

PARASITES OF CATTLE, SHEEP, AND GOATS —

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts in Cattle

rr
et
tal

 

  
  

  
    
 

 

S | Moniezia benédeni. oy asi
bum papillosus
50x 22 ym

      

           

 

 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Sy s we
Haemonchus Ostertagia sp. Tricho- Bunostomum sp. Cooperia sp.
contortus = 80x 45 ym_strongylus sp. 95 x 50 77x34
am x34 ym : 7
80x 45 ym 85x 40pm Nematodirus spathiger
200 x 908m
Cryptosporidium
Dictyocaulus ®
viviparus tarva 6 ym
i Eimeria zurnii
\, 390-450 x 259m 18 x [Sam
Trichuris ovis
75 x 35pm
E. auburnensis Eimeria bovis Boum je
40 x 24m 28 x20 pm 50um Fasciola hepatica
140 x 80pm
Fig. 70. Common parasite eggs and oocysts found in cattle feces.
Coccidia in Cattle
Table 19. Major species of coccidia of cattle
Species Average size (um) Prepatent Period
., Eimeria bukidnonensis 44x 32 15-17 days

 

. Eimeria aubernensis 39x 23 18-20 days
J Eimeria bovis 28x20 15-20, day's:
© Eimeria:cylindrica 23x14 ALedaysi es

 

| Elnwria- alabamensis 19x13 Tdays:
Eimeria ziwnii 18x16 1517 daj
iieria ellipsoidalis 17x13

 
 
  

  
Std

Section $

Location of Major Parasites in Cattle

      
  
  
  
  
   
   

Ectoparasites

 

ce Haematopinus Mies Sarcoptes

Linognathus Psoroptes
Solenopotes Chorioptes
Damatinia Demodex
Ticks Dermacentor Fies Stomoxys
Haemaphysalis Siphona
Ixodes Musca

 

Otobius (1 eat) Fasclola hepatica

 

Cecum & Colon
Trichuris

Oesophagostomum

 

Trichostrongylus

Cooperia Paramphistomum
Nematodirus

Bunostomum

Strongyloides

Moniezia

Eimeria spp.

Cryplospaidiem

Fig. 71. Locations of the major parasites found in cattle.

Zoonotic Diseases in Cattle

Table 20, Major zoonotic diseases associated with cattle

  

  

Parasites of Cattle

Muscle

Taenia saginata (Cyslicorcus)
Sarcocystis (Sarcocyst}

  
   
  

Thelazia

  

Connective Tissue

 

‘Onchocerca
Hypoderma (ava)

 

Dictycautus viviparus

Abomasum
Haemonochus

Ostertagia
Trichostrongytus

 

 

Organism Disease Method of Infection
Protozoa

Sarcocystis bominis Intestinal sarcosporidiosis Ingestion of raw beef

Trypanosoma rhodesiense African trypanosomiasis Bite of tsetse fly

Cryptosporidium sp. Cryptosporidiosis Ingestion of oocysts
Nematodes

Thelazia spp. Thelaziasis Ocular contact with fly vector

Trichostrongylus spp. Trichostrongyliasis Ingestion of larvae
Trematodes

Fasciola hepatica Fascioliasis Ingestion of metacercariae
Cestodes

Taenia saginata Taeniasis Ingestion of cysticerci in meat

 

70

   
 
 
 
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep; and Ge

 
  
  

SARCOCYSTIS LIFE CYCLE

   

Fig. 72a Life ‘aenia saginata.

Sporocysts.
in feces

 

Fig. 72b. Life cycle of Sarcocystis beminis.

fensitey : Sarcocysts
S. bovicanis is 8. erizi Sarcocyst

S. bovifelis is S. hirsuta
S. bovibominis is 8. hominis SN |

Fecal Eggs and Oocysts in Sheep and Goats

 

 

 

RELATIVE SIZES OF
SHEEP PARASITE EGGS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Eimeria species:

 

Moniezia expansd
50=60ym:

   
 
 
 
   
  
 

  

£. crandaliis E. ahsata

22 x 19m 33 x 24 ym
Strongyloides:

papillosis,
SOx 22

 

E. invicaa
47 x 32pm

 

©}

E pava
16 x [dum 27 x 18pm

&. ovina

Tiichuris ovis:

   

. 75 x 35,
3 Not aoe :
Haemonchus Ostertagia sp. Tricho- Nematodirus spathiger
cortortus 80x 45pm _— strongylus sp. 50ym 200 x 90pm
80x 45m
2 85x 40ym 50ym

  

Common parasite eggs and oocysts found in sheep feces.

71

 

ARZY
    
  
     
 
  

 

ey

E. pallida

St tap, E. crandallis
E. ovinoidalis ee D

 

E. granulosa é bakuensis (ovina)

40 pm.

 

Fig. 74. Sporulated Eimeria species found in sheep.

 

   

E. arlonigi A E. caprovina
E. caprina

 

E. jolchijevi

E. christenseni

 

a :
pm x

Fig. 75. Sporulated Eimeria species found in goats. neg igre

72
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Table 21. Major species of coccidia in sheep and goats

 

  

 

Species Size (un) Prepatent Period — Species Size (jum) Prepatent Period

Sheep Goats
Eimeria intricata 47 x32 20-27 days meria christenseni 38 x25 14-23 days
Eimeria absata 33x24 18-21 days Eimeria caprina 32x23 17-20 days
Eimeria faurei 29x21 12-14 days Eimeria arloingi 27x18 19 days
Eimeria ovina 29x21 19 days Eimeria birci 23x19 15-20 days
Eimeria ovinoidalis 23 x18 9-15 days Eimeria ninakobtyakimovae 23 x 18 10-13 days
Eimeria crandallis 22x19 15-20 days meria aligevi 16x14 7-12 days
Eimeria parva 16x 14 11-15 days

 

Location of Major Parasites in Sheep and Goats

 

Ectoparasites l

Lice - Damaiinia
Linognathus
Ked - Melophagus
Stike - Luatia
Flies Coniphora
Ctvysomya

Miles - Chorioples

Cecum & Coton

Oesophagostomum
Chabertia
Tichuris

 

Trichostrongylus
Cooperia
Nemaloditus
Bunostomum
Strongyloides
Moniezia

 
  

‘Small Intestine

Parasites of Sheep

   
  
    
 

Muscle

 

    

Brain

Taenia muiticeps (Coenurus)

Taenia ovis
(Cysticercus)

         

 

Taenia hydatigena (Cysticercus)

   
 

Toxoplasma
(Pseudocyst)

     

Nasal Sinus

     
    
 
 
  
  

estrus ovis

Dictyocaulus
Muelierius
Hydatid cyst

   

    
  
 
 
 

Fasciola

Thysanosoma

 
 
    
 

| Romasum
Paramphistomum Haemonchus
Ostertagia

Trichostrongylus

Fig. 76, Locations of the major parasites found in sheep. (Most of these are also in goats.}

2

fF
et

wt
 

Bt

  

3
wy
®

Fig, 77, Life cyde of Eimeria spp. in sheep and other ruminants.

Zoonotic Diseases in Sheep and Goats

Table 22. Major zoonotic diseases associated with sheep

SCHIZONTS.

MEROZOITES

  
 
   
  

P-MICROGAMETES (Coo,

  
   
 

MACROGAMETE (9)

 

 

Organism Disease Method of Infection
Protozoa
Toxoplasma gondii Toxoplasmosis Ingestion of raw meat

   
   
   
 
  

Cryptosporidium sp. Cryptosporidiosis
Sarcocystis bovibominis Diarrhea

les a,
ig sloides spp: Strongyloidiasis
neylus Trichostrongyfiasis

  

Fascioliass:

Myiasis®:
Myinsis

  

Oestriis ovis:

Ingestion of oocysts
Ingestion of raw meat

Ingestion of larvae
Ingestion of larvae

Ingestion of metacercariae

Contact with adult flies
Contact with adult flies

 

74

 
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

   

Cryptosporidium spp.

Onn

Fig. 79. Cryplosporidina spp. (Oacysts in feces)

 

Toxoplasma gondii

Fig. 78. Toxoplasma gondii. (Psewdocyst in the brain of a

 
   
   

      
     
 
      

sheep).
icrogametocyte (dg)
(J) Microgametes (id)
Merozoites’

‘Macrogametocyte (9)

Big Macrogamete (9)
Schizonts On
sexual Sexual (By Zale

ate

ark a 8
6 Ooyst

 

om
O— oocyst

oo eA keaves Host

 

  

 

ingested ---\7 aoa ——
woo ~ gun of Host -

   

Fig, 80. Life cycle of Crypiosporidinm parvum.

75

4 gQy
 

Fig. 81a. Histologic section of lamb small intestine with numerous Cryptosporidium oocysts (arrows) imbedded in the brush

borders of the villi.

Neospora caninunt

Common name: Neospora caninunt.

Size of pseudocyst: Usually <100 jim.

Importance; This parasite can cause abortions.
Liveborn calves may be underweight, weak, un-

 

able to stand, and may have neuromuscular signs.
Transplacental transmission occurs.

 
    

|) Diagnosis: Clinical signs and histologically. Pseudocysts

Ve seen in neural tissue at necropsy.

Saurce'Sf infection: Unknown.

Treaimé
*éididstats and coccidiocides may be helpful.

 

Treatment is experimental. Some coc-

   
 

Fig, 81b. Neospora caninun1 pseudocyst in the. br:
aborted calf. :

76
LL

Drugs Used in Ruminants

 

3. Effi of anthelmintics agaist major internal parasi

 

¢ Adie Nematodes (Ya)

 

 

 

 

 

   

           

        

  
 

   

        

Drug Dose (myfke PO) Ostertagia  Haemanebits  Tricbostrongylus vaperia Nematodirus Bunastomunt Strongyloides Oesophagostontiait
Albendazole 10.0 97-100 97-99 99-100 97-100 87-100 100 _ 100
Clorsulont 7.0
Coumaphos 80-100 95-100 95-100 100 7 - - -
Doramectin CAM 95-100 95-100 95-100 100 ~ 5-100 _ 95-100
Fprinomectia 0.5 Pour on 95-100 95-100 95-100. 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100
Febautet 100 0-100 100 - ~ =- ~
Feabendazole 100 95-100 100 95-100 95-100 80-100 95-100
95-100 95-100 95-100 $0-100 _ -

is 5-100 100 95-100 100 -
Morantel 80-100 loo 100 -
Mowidectin 0.5 Pour on 95-100 95-100 95-100 =-
o azole 100 5-100 100
Oxibendazole Ica. 95-100. 80-100 loo
Phenothiazine 220-400 $0-100 95-100 0-100. 0-100 —
Pyrantel 25 95-100 —e 100 95-100 — — ama

       

 

Dash indicates insufficient data or not effective,

°95-100% cffective against Fasciola be patica, both immature and mature.

hg 24hx7d.

Note: Lactating dairy cattle can be treated with eprinomectrin at 0.5 mg/kg as a pour on, 0.5 mg/kg moxidectin as a pour on, coumaphos as a top
ing on feed at 2 my/kg for 6 consecutive days, fenbendazole at 5-10 mg/kg PO, or with morantel at 10 mg/kg PO (see Courtney and Sundlof, 1994).

 

 

AAY

sivor pue ‘daayg ‘a[e- jo sauseavg
82

    
 

cy of anthelmint

  

st major internal

 

{fficacy against Adult Parasites (%)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

  

Drag Dose(myfky PO) Haemonchus Ostertagia Trichostrongylus Cooperia Nematodirus Bunostomunn Strongyloides Chabertia | Moniezia

Albendazole 10 99-100 97-100 99-100 99-100 99-100 a _- 100 100

Dorameetin 0.2

Febantel 5 95-100 95-100 95-100 _- 95-100 95-100 95-100 — _

Fenbendazale 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 - 80-100 85-95

Ivermectin 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 - 95-100 95-100 _

Levamisole 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 60-85 95-100 _

(5 SC & IM)

Morantel 10 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 - _ 95-100 -

Oxfendazale 5 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 — — 95-100 95-100

Oxibendazole 10 95-100 95-100 0-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100

Pyrantel 25 95-100 — 0-100 _ _— — —

Dash indicates not effective or insufficient data {sce Courtney and Sundlof, 1991).
Note: Doramectin and ivermectin are similar drugs.

Table 25. Major anticoccidial drugs used in cattle Table 26. Major anticaccidial drugs used in sheep and goats

Drog Method Use Level Drag Method Use Level

Ampraliam (prevention) Tn feedwater S mg/kg x 2d Amproliam Water 30 my/kg of body weight q 24h

Amproliam (treatment) In feedéwater 10 my/ky x Sd X21 dor 0.2% in feed

Aurcomycin-tetracycline (prevention) In feed 35 pd x 28d Decoguinate Feed 0.5 myfkg of bady weight m feed

Decaquinate (prevention) In feed OS myfky x 284d Lasalocid Feed 30 2/909 ke (ton) of feed

Lasalocid (prevention) In feed 1 2/30 ky feed 4AS4 pf 18% active23 ky (50 Ibjsalt
( mefky of Monensin Feed 10-30 2/909 ke (ton) of feed
body weight) Sulfagaanidine Feed 0.2% concentration in feed

Monensin (prevention) In feed 1 /30 kg feed Sulfamethazine Feed up to 0.5% concentration in feed

efky of TT

body weight)

Sulfaquinoxaline In water 13 mg/kg

Salfamerazine In feed 65-130 m:

   

§ w0ond05
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Table 27. Major drugs for control of external parasites in ruminants

 

 

Organophosphares
Chlorfenvinphos (Supona)
Chlorpyrifos (Durshan}
Coumaphos (Co-Ral)

Crotoxyphos (Cyodrin)
Cmfomnte (Roulene)
Diazinon

Dichtorves (Vapona)
Dimethoate (Cygon)
Dioxathion (Delnav]
Famphur (Warbex}
Fenchlorphos (Korlan-ronnel)
Fenthion (Tiguvon)

Malathion (Cythion}
Phosmet (Profate)
‘Tetrachtorvinphos
(ahor-stirophos}
‘Trichlorfon (Neguvon)

Carbamates
Carbaryl (Sevin)
Proposur

Organochtorines
Lindane
Methoxychtor (Marlate)
Toxaphene

 

Diamidines
Amitraz
(Mitahan, Triatox, Bam,
Preventic collars)

Miscellaneous**
Cypermethrin (P) (Curatick)
Dorameectin (Dectomax)
Eprinomectin (Ivomec-Eprines)

Fenvalerate®?) (Fetrin)
Ivermectin (Ivomec)
Methoprene (IGR)
Moxidectin (Cydeetin)
Pyrethrum

Permethrin (P) (Eetihan}
Resmethrin (P}

Bacillus thuringiensis (B)

 

 

 

As, lice, flies, keds, mites
Ticks, lice
Fleas, flies, keds, lice, ticks, cattle grabs

Ticks, mites, lice, flies

Flies, lice, mites, ticks

Flies, lice, keds, ticks

Flies

Hes

Hes, keds, lice, ticks

Fis, lice, cattle grubs

Flies, lice, mites, ticks

Cartle grabs, sheep nose hots,
lice, keds, hlowdlies

as, flies, lice, kecls, mites, ticks
Flies, lice, cattle gruhs, ticks
Fleas, flies, lice, ticks

 

Cartle grabs, flies, tice, mi

 

Fleas, tlies, tice, mites, ticks
Flies

  

Hlics, keds, lice, mites, ticks
Fics, keds, lice, mites, ticks
Fics, keds, lice, mites, ticks

Ticks, mites, lice +/-*

 

Sucking fice, grabs, Psoroptes

Lice, hom flies, Sarcoptes,
Chorioptes, yrabs

Fie

ice, mites, cattle grubs

Flies,

ice, Charioptes, Psoroptes

Fes, fleas, keds, lice

Flies, lice, mites, ticks

Ticks

Aquatic insect vac

 

 

 
 

   

Dip, spray

Dip, spray, pour on, cust, hack rabher

Dip, spray, pour on, cast, hack nabher,
feel acklitive

Dust, spray

Dip, spray, pour on

Dip, «lust, spray

Resin granules, resin strips, spray

Spray

Dip, spray, hack mabher

Pour on, spray

Dust, oral, spray, hack rubber, pour on

Spray, pour on, spor on

Dip, dust, spray
Spray
Dust, car tag, hack rubher, spray

 

Pour on, oral, inj

 

table, spray

Dip, dust, spray
Spray

Dust, spray, pour on, hack rubber
Dast, spray, hack nubher
Dip, hist, spray, hack rahber

Dip, spray

Dip

SC or IM (0.2 mg/kg)
Pour on (0.5 mg/

 

Spray, ear tags
Oral, inje
Feed additive

    

rable

 

iM (0.2 meg)

Pour on
Spray

Dip, spray
Spray

Dried powder

 

*4£ = variable efficacy,

**Includes pyrethroids (P), insect growth regulators (IGR), bacteria {B), and others.

Note: For lactating dairy cattle, the folowing drugs are used: coumaphos, crotos

 

yphos, dichlorvos, eprinomectrin,

fenvalerate, malathion, methoprene, methoxychlor, permethrin, pyrethrins, and stirofos.

Read label directions carefully, The label is the most authoritative source of information.

79

aAy
Stq

Section $

 

Haemonchus contortus
@

Fig. 82a. Haemionchns contortus (sheep) Haemonchus pla-

Pn,

 

ee

cei (cattle) prepatent period is 17-21 days.

 

 

Ostertagia ostertagi

AN

. 83a. Ostertagia ostertagi (cattle) Teladorsagia circu

 

cincta (sheep) prepatent period is 16-23 days.

 

Trichostrongylus axei

~~ UL! @

Fig. 84a. Trichostrongylus axei prepatent period is 3
weeks.

Internal Parasites

Haemoncbus contortus

Common name: Barher’s pole or wire worm (Trichostrongyloidea),

Adult size: 10-30 mm in ahomasim.

Size of egg: 80 yun x 45 am,

Importance: Acute anemia in lambs; hottle jaw, death, chronic
weight loss in adult

Diagnosis: Fecal flotation; eggs do not larvate after 4-5 days of
refrigeration. At necropsy, adults are found in abomasum.

 

   

‘Treatment: Drug resistance often develops.
Alhendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg 1M or

 

Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

Ivermectin, 0.2 mgfkg $C

Fenhendazole, 5 mgfky PO

Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg PO (cattle)

Morante! tartrate, 9.7 mg/kg PO

Moxidectin, 0.5 my/kg pour on

Tetramisole, 15 mgfkg PO (or sheep, do not exceed total 600-
mg dosage)

Ostertagia ostertagi

Common name: Brown stomach worm (Trichostrongyloidea).
Adutt size: 6-10 mm in abomasum.

 

c of egg: 8 yim x45 yun,
Importance: Larvae destroy gastric glands of cattle; may cause
Larvae mature and

 

severe diarrhea and weight loss. Type
adults produce eggs. Pre:
Fourth-stage larvae are inhibited in gastric glands. Type I:
Maturation of inhihited larvae with weight loss, diarrhea,

 

spe Iz Not clinically apparent.

 

anorexia, anemia, no fever, often no eggs in feces.

 

 

Diagnosis: Fecal flotation; plasma pepsinogen levels may be in-
creased. At necropsy, adults and nodular lesions are found
in abomasum.

Treamment: Mbendazole, 10 mg/kg PO kills Type Il

Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg IM or SC

Eprinomeetrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

Fenhendazole, 3 mg/kg PO kills Type Il at 10 mgykg
Wermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC kills Type Il

Morantel tartrate, 9.7 mg/kg PO

 

 

Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on kills Type I

Trichostrongylus axei

Common name: Bankrupt wort or small stomach worm
(Trichostrongyloidea).

Adult size: 4-8 mm. in ahomasum,

Size of egg: 80 jem x 40 jun.

Importance: In cattle, sheep, goats there is diarrhea, dehydration,

 

hottle jaw, and emaciation in stressed animals.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. At necropsy, adults (4-6 mm)
in abomasum.
Treatment: Alhendazale, 10 mgfke PO
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg IM or SC

 

Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Fenbendazole, Spring, 5 mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, Fall, 0.2 mg/kg SC
Morantel tartrate, 9.7 mgékg PO

 

Mosidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Fig. 82c. Haemonchus contortus .

ha

4

®

 

Fig, 83c. Ostertagia ostertagi.

Fig. 84c. Trichostrongylus axei.

  
Section 5

 

Nematodirus spp.

   

Fig. 88a. Nematadirus spp. prepatent period is 14-21
days.

 

    

  

Fig. 87a. Oesophagostomum columbian prepatent peri-
od is 40 days.

82

Nematodirus spp.

 

Common name: Thin-necked intestinal worm
(richostrogyloidea).
Adult size: 10-25 mm in small intestine. Sheep: N. fili-

collis, N. battus. N. spathiger; cattle: N. belve-

 

tianus.
re of eg

 

. filicollis 200 jum x 90 jim; N. battus 175
yon x 75 pun.

Importance: Acute diarrhea in young animals; may be
fatal, especially N. battus.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. At necropsy, adults
are found in small intestine.

Treatment; Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO

Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

 

 

Fenbendazole, 5 mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mefkg $C
Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg PO
Morantel tartrate, 9.7 mg/kg PO-
Mosidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

Strongyloides papillosus

Common name: Threadworm (Rhabcitoidea }.
Adult si
Size of eg

 

-6 mm in small intestine,

‘0 im x 22 pm.

Importance: Cutancous exposure in sheep may con-
tribute to foot rot, diarrhea in young animals;
transmammary transmission possible.

Diagnosis: Larvated eggs or larvae in fecal flotation.

Treatment: Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on.

Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC

 

  

Oecsophagostomunt colunbiantun

Common name: Nodular worm (Strongyloidea).

Adult size: 14-22 mm in large intestine. Sheep and
goats: O. columbianun, O, venilosini; cattle; O.
radiation.

Size of egg: 80 jum xX 40 Jon.

Importance: Nodular worm of sheep and cattle.

 

 

May
cause diarrhea with subsequent fly strike in sheep.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation, At necropsy, nodules
are seen in walls of small and large intestines and

 

adults are found in large intestine.
Treatment; Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Dorameetin, 0.2 mg/kg IM or SC
Eprinomeetrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg PO
Morantel tartrate, 9.7 mg/kg PO.
Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

 
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

   
 

Fig. 85¢, Nematodirus batts.

 

Fig. 87c. Ocsophagostonuu columbian.

 
Section 5

 

Trichostrongylus colubriformis

~ WH @

Fig. 88. Trichostrongylus colubriformis prepatent periot is
3 weeks.

 

Cooperia spp.

__ @

Fig. 89, Cooperia spp. prepatent period is 3 weeks.

“~~

 

Bunostomum spp.
~

 

ETA —_

Fig. 90. Busssostommum spp. prepatent period is 2 months.

84

Trichostrongylus colubriformis

Common name: Hair worm, black scour worm
(Trichostrongyioidea).

Adtult size: 4-8 mov in small inrestine.

Size of egg: 85 jim x 40 pum,

Importance; In sheep ant goats, acute diarrhea in youngs
chronic diarrhea in older animals. May cause bottle
jaw and severe reduction in growth.

Diagnosis; Eggs in fecal floration. At necropsy, adults are
found in small intestine.

‘Treatment: Albencazole, 10 mg;

Doramectin, 0.2 mgfkg IM or $

  

 

 

Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Fenbendazole, 5 mg/kg PO
Levamisole, 75 mg/kg PO
Morantrel tartrate, 9.7 mg/kg PO-
Moxidlectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

Cooperia spp.

Common name; Cattle bankrupt worm (Tricho-strongy-
loictea).
Adctult size: 4-8 mi in small intestine.

 

attle: C. pectinata,
GC. punctata, C. spatulata, C. memasteri (surnabada\;
sheep anc goats: C. panietata, C. pectinata.

Size of egg: 77 jun x 34 yom.

Importance: In cattle, sheep, and goats, not highly patho-
genic; diarrhea, anorexia, depressed growth.
Synergistic with Ostertagia ostertagia.

Diagnosi
found in small intestine.

Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO

Doranwetin, 0.2 mefkg IM or SC
Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Fenbendazole, 5 mg/
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC
Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg PO
Miorantel tartrate, 9.7 mg/ky PO
Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

'ggsin fecal flotation. At necropsy, adults are

 

 

 

 

 

Bunostomuun spp.

Common name: Hookworm (Prichostrongyloiea}.

Adtult size: 10-28 mim in small intestine, Cattle: B, phte-
botomnim, Sheep: B, trigonocephahion.

Size of epg: 95 jtm x 50 jim.

Importance: In cattle and sheep, anemia and diarrhea in

 
  

young animals, loss of weight, death.
Diagnosis; Eggs in fecal flotation. At necropsy, adults are
found in small intestine.
‘Treatment: Albencazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Dorameetin, 0.2 mg/kg IM or SC
Eprinomectrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Fenbendazole, 5 mg/kg PO
Ivermeetin, 0.2 mg/kg SC
Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

 

 
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Table 28. Miscellancons ‘trichostrongyle parasites of ruminants that have similar “strongyle-rype" eyes in feces,

and other miscellaneous parasites

 

 

Cattle Strongyles
Bunostomum phlebotomunt
Cooperia memasteri (surnabada}
Cooperia oxcophora
Cooperia punctata
Cooperia pectinatia
Haemonchus placei
Oesophagostonium radiatum
Oesophagestomum venulosum

Ostertagia ostertagia
Trichostrongylus axel
Trichostrongylus colubriformis

Sheep and Goat Strongyles
Bunostomunt trigonocephalium
Chabertia ovina
Cooperia curtice’

Cooperia pectinata

Cooperia punctate

Cooperia oncophora
Haemonchus contortus
Oesopbagostomun columbianum
Ovsopbayostomen venulosum
Ostertagia lyrata

Teladorsagia ciremmecincta
Teladorsagia trifurcata
Trichostrongylus axei
Trichostrongylus colubriformis
Trichostrongylus vitrinus
Trichostrongylus capricola

Other Miscellaneous Nematodes Parasites

Cattle
Parafilaria bovicola

Sheep and Goats

Skrjabinema ovis

Cattle hookworm
Cattle bankrupt worm
Cattle bankrupt worm
Cattle bankrupt worm
Cartlke bankrupt worm
Barber's pole worm
Nodular worm
Nodular worm

Brown stomach worm
Bankrupt or hair worm
Hair worm

Hookworm
Large-mouthed bowel worm
Coaperid

Cooperid

Cooperid

Cooperid

Barber's pole worm
Nodular worm,
Nodular worm

Brown stomach worm
Brown stomach worm
Brown stomach worm
Bankrupt or hair worm
Hair worm

Mair worm

Hair worm

Filarial worm

Pinvorm

Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult

Adult i
Adult i
Adult i

Adult

Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult
Adult

Adult i

Adulti

in
in
in

in

  
 

 

in

in
in
in
in
in
in
in
in
in

in

small intestine
small imestine
small intestine
small intestine
small intestine
bomasum

large intestine
lan

 

imiestine

  

abomasum

 

abomasum
sinall intestine

small intestine
colon

smal] intestine
small intestine
small intestine
small intestine
abomasum
large
large intestine

 

intestine

 

abomasum
abomasum
abomasum
abomasum
small intestine
small intestine
small intestine

subeutancons tissue

cecum

 

85

AQY
Section 5

 
   

in
WW
savin ‘ cf 4
No sp.
SP

Fig. 93a. Capillaria sp. prepatent period is 6 weeks.

 

86

Trichuris ovis

Cominon name: Whipworm (Hichuroidea).
Adult size: 2-3 nim in cecum and large intestine.
Size of egg: 75 jum x 35 yum.
Importance: Rarely: pathogenic; overwhelming infec
tions may cause fatal hemorrhage into cecum.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal tlotation. At necropsy, adults
are found in cecum and large intestines.
‘Treatment: Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg IM or $C
Eprinomeetrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Fenbendazole, 5 mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC

  
 

Chabertia ovina

Common name: Large-mouth bowel worm
(Strongyloidea).
Aduft size: 13-20 mum in large intestine.
Size of epg: 100-120 jun x 40-50 jun,
Importance: Occasionally causes severe anemia.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. At necropsy, adults
are found in colon.
Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 5 m/ky PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC

Capillaria sp.

Common name: Capillary worm (Trichuroidea).
; 5-8 mm in small intestine.
+ 30 Lum x 30 pum.
Importance: Mostly nonpathogenic, but egg may be
confused with Trickzris spp.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.

Treatment: None tested.
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg IM or SC
Eprinomeetrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Fenbendazole, $ mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mgfkg SC

 

 

 
   
     

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

2 Ry Sg

Fig. 91c. Trichuris ovis.

 

Fig. 93c. Capillaria sp.
SIA

Section 5

 
 
 

ae hy

panna

“
x

‘--?

 
    
     

  

Cr,

Dictyocaulus viviparus

a

Fig. 94a. Dictyocaudus vivipants tcattle), Dictyocaulus fi-
Lia (sheep| prepatent period is 4 weeks (22-25 days).

 

 

Fig. 95a. Protostrongylus rufescens (sheepl, P. rushi, P.
stidesi (highorn sheep] prepatent period is 5 weeks.

 

. Muellerius capillaris

ey

Fig. 96a. Muellerins capillaris prepatent period is 3 weeks.

 

88

Dictyocaulus viviparus

Common name: Lungworm (Trichostrongyloidea}.
Adult si 8 em in lungs.
Size of larva: 390-450 pum x 20-25 jim.
Importance: Young animals (acute form): cough,
yanosis, clyspnea. Adults (chronic form): cough,
dyspnea, lethargy.
Diagnosis; Baermann technique for larvae from feces:
aracteristic larvae (many interstitial cells, short
tail). Fecal flotation: larvated ova or some free
larvae in feces. At necropsy, actult (3-5 em) in
passages of lung, Cattle: D. viviparus: sheep: D.
filaria.
‘Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Dorameetin, 0.2 mgfkg IM or SC
Eprinomeetrin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Fenbendazole, 5 mg/kg, PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC
Levamisole, 5-8 mg/kg PO in early spring
Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

 

 

 

 

el

  

 

 

Protostrongylus spp.

Common name: Bighorn sheep lungworm
(Metastrongyloidea).

Adult size: 10-20 mm in lungs.

Size of larva: 340-400 jum x 20 um.

Importance: Predisposes to pneumonia in bighorn
sheep; transplacental transmission in bighorn
sheep, respiratory signs.

Diagnosis: Uncommon in domestic sheep. Baermann,
technique for larvae from feces. Fiber optic endo-
scope to visualize adulis.

Treatment; Albendazole, 10 me/ky PO

Fenbendazole, 15 mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mafka SC

 

Muellerius capillaris

Common name: Goat lingworm (Metastrongyloidea).
Adult size: 4-12 mm in lungs.
300 jum x 15 pum.
Importance: May predispose to pneumonia
Diagnosis: Baermann technique for larvae from feces.
Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 15 mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mafky SC

 

ze of lary:

 

     
    
  
   

Parasites

Mb. | Fig. 94c. Dictyocaulus viviparus.

 

a goes S Gs

Fig. 95c. Protostrongyles sp. (Note long, straight tail.)

 

   

Fig. 96b. Mucllerius capillaris. Fig. 96c. Mielleritts capillaris. (Note kinky tail.)

89
Section 5

StH

Ne Fasciola hepatica J
~<a 7

Fig. 97a. Fasciola hepatica prepatent periott is 10-12
weeks.

 

 

(sheep) prepatent period is 40 days.

   

Thitrichomonas foetus

Fig. 99a, Tritrichomonas foetis ceproduces quickly.

 

ig. 98a. Moniesia benedeni (cattle), Moniesia expanse

90

Fasciola hepatica

Common name: Common liver fluke (Fasciolidae).
Adult size: 3-4 em in hepatic bile ctuets.

ze of egg: 140 yam x $0 jim,

Importance: Acute syndrome: hepatic trauma cue to

  

migration may result in hepatitis anc ceath.
Chronic syndrome; anemia, weight loss, clecreased
production and weaning weights, liver concemna-
tion; predisposes to clostridial diseases.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal sectimentation. At necropsy,
trematodes (flukes) are found in bile ducts, tracts
within liver parenchyma. Serology: ELISA test.
Treatment; Albendazole, PO 10 mg/kg (cattle); 15
mg/kg (sheep)
Clorsulon, 7 mg/kg PO
Nitroxynil, 10 mg/kg $C
Rafoxanide, 7.5 my/ky PO
Prevention: Snail control; fence off snail-infested areas.

 

 

 

Moniezia benedeni

Common name: Tapeworm (Anoplocephalidae).

Adult size: Up to 100 em in small intestine.

ze of egg: 60 yur.

Importance; Relatively nonpathogenic.

Diagnosis: Rectangular segments in feces, eggs in fecal
flotation. At necropsy, adult tapeworms (00 em)

   

in small intestine.

Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Dichlorophen, 200-400 mg/kg PO.
Fenbendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Lead arsenate, 0.5-1.0 g/50 Ib. PO
Niclosamie, 50 mg/lb. PO.

 

Tritrichomonas foetus

Common name: Trich (Mastigophora), a fagellated

protozoan parasite.

 

Size of trophozoite: 10-25 jum in genital tract.
Importance: Venereal disease of cattle, early abortion
storms (15 to 18 cays after conception) and py-
ometra.
Diagnosis: Preputial washings and culture.
Treatment: Ipronitazole, 30 g/bull on day I, then 15
g/bull q 24h on cays 2 and 3.
Metronidazole, 75 mg/kg IV q 12 hx 3
Self-limiting in cows not bred for 90 days after abor-
tion,
Note: Trichomonas vaginalis in humans is treated with
metronidazole, 500 mg q 12h x 7 d,or2 gina

single dose, or 2. g.q 24h x 3-5 cb.

 
    
 

Fig. 9b: Tritrichomonas foetus. Fresh smear.

 

Parasites-of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Fig. 97. Fasciola hepatica. The operculum has opened.

 

   

Fig. 99¢. Tritrichomonas foetis. Stained specimen.

YAY
Section 5

 

Fig. 100a. Babesia bigeming. Incubation period is variable

(14-70 days).

 

Eimeria spp.

Fig. 10 1a. Eimeria spp. Prepatent perind is 12-18 days.

      
  

    

mS

)
OQ
Hie 10a: Cypnsporidinarsp. Prepon pend &3-9
days,

ate
7g Gee.

  

Cryptosporidium spp.

92

Babesia bigemina

Common name: Babesia or pyroplasma (Apicomplexa).

Size of trophozoites: 2-3 jun x 4-5 im in red blood
cells.

Importance: Causes Texas cattle fever (babesiosis, pyro-
plasmosis), anemia, high fever, splenomegaly. This
is am exotic and reportable disease in the USA. It
is transmitted by Boophilus ticks, which are also
reportable.

Diagnosis: Stained blood smear.

‘Treatment; Dip for ticks.

Acriflayine, 200-400 ml IV or 1:200 to 1:1,000 solu-
tion

Berenil, 3.5-5.0 mg/kg IM

Phenamide, 9.0-13.5 mg/kg IM

 

Eimeria spp.

Common name: Coccidia (Apicomplexa).

Size of oocyst: 16-47 jm x 13-32 Jun in small intes-
tine; several species. (See Tables 19 and 21.)
Importance: Some pathogenic species cause clinical coc-

cidiosis. Young animals: bloody diarrhea, death.
Adults: decreased production, diarrhea.
Diagnosis: Occysts in fecal flotation. Hyperemic, hem-
orrhagic intestines, whitish raised lesions in intes-
tines found at necropsy.
Treatment: Amprolinm, 10 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 5-21 d
Sulfamethazine, 0.5% in feed, or 130 mg/kg PO, then
65 mg/kg q 12h x4d
Prevention: Decoquinate, 0.5 mg/kg PO q 24h x 284d
Lasalocid, 1 mg/kg PO q 24 hx 30+ d
Monensin, 0.25 mgfkg PO in feed q 24hx 31d
Sulfaguanidine, 0.2% of feed

Cryptosporidiunt spp.

Common name: Crypto (Apicomplexa).

Size of oocyst: 6 jum x 6 jm in small intestine.

Importance: Diarrhea in calves 1-2 weeks old; varying
pathogenicity; transmissible to humans.

Diagnosis: Oocysts in fecal flotation. Oacysts float high
against coverslip — focus high.

‘lreatment: Supportive care.
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

eM é
Fig, 101b. Eaneria sp. (arrow). Fig. 101c, Eimeria sp.

 

 
Section 5

 

py <m
Fig. 103. Gongylonema pulcbrunt prepatent period is 1m-
known.

  

Stephanofilaria spp.

Fig. 104, Stephanofilaria stilest prepatent period is 6-8
weeks.

 

Onchocerca spp.

Onchocerca spp. prepatent period is 6-12

 

months.

  

94

Gougylonema sp.

Common name: Esophageal worm (Spiruroidea).

Aduh size: 3-12 em in mucosa of esophagus.

Size of egy: 70-35 jim.

Importance: Very low pathogenicity, but may cause irri-
tation.

Diagnosis: F;

 

  

us in fecal flotation.
Treatment: None known,

 

Stephanofilaria spp.

Common name: Brisket worm (Filarioidea).

Adult size: 3-8 cm in subcutancous tissue,

Size of microfilaria: 500-600 jum.

Importance: Causes cermatic lesions on the ventral ab-

 

domen.
Deep skin scrapings; look for adults or mi-

 

Diagnosi:
crofilariae in tissue near lesion.

Treatment: None.

Prevention: Control of horn flies, the vector.

Onchocerca spp.

Common name: Skin nodular worm (Filarioidea).
Adult (rp to 80 em) coiled in subcutaneous tissue,

Size of microfilariae: 200 - 260 jun.

Microfilariae may cause keratitis or iritis.

  

Importance
Infected carcass may not be switable for sale,
Diagnosi
cised piece of skin near nodules.

identification of microfilariae from an ex-

  

‘Treatment: None,
Prevention: Arthropod control.
 

Selariacervi

Fig. 106. Setaria (Artionema) sp. prepatent periad & variable.

 

Fig, 107. Parampbistunmen sp. prepatent period
days.

 

 
  
 

Qe -- ao.

Taenia saginata

Fig. 108. Tuenia saginata prepatent period is $-10 weeks.

95

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Setaria cervi

Common name: Abdominal worm t¥ilarioidead.

Adult size: 8-13 cm; free in abdominal cavity in cattle,
sheep, and goats

Size of microfilariac: 140-230 ym.

Importance: May cause cerebral nematadiasis. Usually
nonpathogenic.

 

Diagnosis: Identification of microfilariag in blood.
Treatment: None.

Paramphistonmut sp.

Common name: Rumen flake (Paramphistomatidse).
Adult size: 5-15 mm in rumen.

Siz 150 pm x 75 pm.

Importance: Aduks are nonpathogenic. Immature

 

flukes may cause enteritis and diarrhea,
Diagnosis; Fecal sedimentation technique, detect ERs.
Treatment: Niclosamide, 90 mgfky PO

Oxyelozanide, 25 myfky PO

 

 

 

Taenia sagiata

 

Common name: Beef eysti

 

‘osis, measles

   

3-10 mm.
Importance: Responsihte for carcass contlemnation, re-

Size of cysticercus:

 

tention, or trimming, ‘Transmission is from eggs in

 

human icees to cattle by ingestion.

Diagnosis: Obser

 
    

ation at necropsy; serological tests,
Treatment; None that are economically justified.
Prevention; Prevent contamination of human feces in

cattle feed.

 

In humans, treated with niclosimide

   

\ saginata

 

{Yomesan) 2 x chewed as a single done y 24 hx
d or with prazignamel 5-20 mg/kg PO once,

YAY
Section 5

Thysanosoma actinioides

Common name: Fringed tapeworm {Anoplocephalidac}.

Adult size: Up to 30 mm in common bile duet and
smal] intestine.

100 yum x 90 pm.

Importance: Relatively nonpathogenic; decrease

 

 

Size of egg packe

weight gains. Responsible for liver condemnation.
Diagnosis: Segments in feces; observe at necropsy.
‘Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mgfky, PO
Fenbendazole, 5-10 mgéky, PO

  

Fig. 109. Thysanosome actinivides propatent period is |
month,

Taenia hydatigena

Common name; Cysticercis tennicollis (Taeniidae).
Jp to 3 em.
Importance: Cysticereus has one scolex; relatively non-

 

Size of cysticeret

pathogenic; may be confused with a hydatid cyst
(many scolices}.
Diagnosis: Cysticereus found free in peritoneal cavity

 

or attached to or m omentim or liver at necropsy.
o — \ Treatment: None,
: Prevention: Do not feed sheep offal to dogs. Deworm

 

dogs for tapeworms. Do not allow access of sheep
to dog feces.

 

Fig. 110. ‘Taonia bydatigena, Prepatent period in dog. is 51

days.

Echinococcus gramtfosus

 

Common name: Hydatid cyst (Taeniidae).

Size of hydatid cyst: Up to 10 em.

Importance: Sheep are intermediate hosts for FE. graiit-
fosis anc sources of infection for carnivores.

Diagnosis: Cyst is usually fod in hg or liver at
necropsy.

‘Treatment: None.

Prevention: Do not feed sheep offal to dogs or wild

 

canids, treat all dogs for tapeworms.

~~ granulosus
7
ATO"

Fig. 111. Kebinococeus gramulasus, Prepatent period in
dog is 7-9 weeks.

96
  

Taenia ovis

Fig. 112. Taenia ovis. Preparent peviod in clogs is 60 «lays.

  

Taenia multiceps

Fig. 113. Taenia mnilticeps. Prepatent period in dogs is 2-3
months.

 

Elaeophora schneideri

Fig. 114.
months.

 

lacoplora scbneideri prepatent period is 4-5

97

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Taenia ovis

Common name: Sheep eysticercosis (I'aeniidae).

Size of eysticerens: Up to 5 mm.

Importance: Responsible for condemnation or trim-
ming.

Diagnosis: Cysticerens is formd in muscles at neceopsy.

Treatment: None,

Prevention: Do not feed raw meat to dogs or wild
canids. Deworm all dogs for tapeworms.

Taenia nmutticeps

  

Common name: Gid ( dae).
Size of coenurus: Up to 4 em.
Importance: Rare in the United States. Causes CNS dis-

 

orders.
Diagnosis: Coenurus usually in brain at necropsy.
Treatment: None,
Do not feed raw offal to dogs or wild
canids. Deworm all dogs for tapeworms.

Prevention

 

Elaeophora schneideri

Common name: Sorchead, filarial dermatitis

jarioidea).

Adult size: 6-12 mm in arteries anterior to heart, mi-
crofilariae in skin of head.

Size of microfilaria: 300 jam X 6 jum.

Importance: A common parasite of mule deer in the

 

 

Western United States. Causes filariat dermatitis

 

“sorchead” in sheep, usually older sheep.

Diagnosis: Microfilariae can be seen in skin, such as a
skin punch from the ear placed in saline in a Petri
dish.

Treatment: None.

AAy
  

‘Section 5

External Parasites

Sig

  

FLIES

 

 

yes. Musca domestica

Musca autumnalis'*:

Fig. 115. Common fliés’ found ant riminants::

Table 29. List of common flies found on cuminants

  

Sarcophaga

  
 
 

Calliphora

 

Siphona

Stomoxys

Smm

 

Genus and Species

Common Name

 

Biting Flies
Simuliton spp.
Culicoides spp.
TabanusiChrysops spp:
Stomoxys culcitrans
Sipbona (Haematobia) irritans
Melopbagus ovinus
Aedes, Culex, Anopheles, etc.

Nonbiting Flies
Musca autunmalis
Musca domestica
Fannia spp.
Erystalis tenax

Myiasis-producing Flies
Hypoderma spp.
Cochliomyia bominovorax
Oestrus ovis
Odemagena tarandi
Cephenentyia spp.
Phaenicia(Lucilia), Phormia, Callipbora

 

98

Black flies, buffalo gnats

Biting gnats, pumkies, no see-ums
Horse and deer flies

Stable fly

Horn fly

Sheep ked

Mosquitoes

Face fly
House fly

Latrine fly, little house fly
Drone fly, cat-tailed maggot

Cattle bot fly

Screwworm fly

Sheep bot fly

Caribou warble fly

Deer nasal bot fly
Blow!lies or fleece. ivorms

 
  
  

Hypoderma lineatum

a

Fig, 116. Hypoderma lineatum (H. bovis is similar). Life
cycle is 10-12 months.

 

Cochtiomyia hominivorax

117. Cochliomyia bominivorax. Life cycle is 3 weeks.

   

 

Blowfly

 

Fig. 118, Sheep blowllies (bottle flies}. Life
days.

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Hypoderma lineatumn

Common name: Common cattle bor fly (H. fineatiin
and northern cattle bot fly (74. boris} {Insecta-

 

 

Diptera).
Size: Larvae (grubs) are up to 30 mm,
Importance; Larvae migrate through flesh and cause a

 

reduction in weight gain and value of hides.
Migrate ta esophagus (H. lineatum) or spinal cal-
umn (H. bovis) before forming warbles on the
back, Adult flies da not sting or bite, but rerrity
cattle and predispose to physical injury and signiti-
cant production losses.

Diagnosi
of cattle. Also occasionally in bison, horse

AAy

 

‘Third-stage larvae form warbles on the back

hoop.

 

and goats.

‘Treatment: Pour-on organophosphates: coumaphor,
famphur, fenthion, trichlorfon; ivermectin, do-
ramectin, eprinomectin, moxidectin. Do not treat

with organophosphates in late fall when grubs are

 

in the submucosa of the esophagus (IF. lixewtum
because an inflammatory edematous reaction may
occur, or in the epidural fat of the spinal ganal (1.
bovis) because inflammation and paraplegia may
occur.

Cochliomyia bominivorax

Common name: Serewworm {Insecta-Diptera}.

Larvae size: Larvae are up to 15 mm.

Importance: A reportable disease in the United States.
Highly pathogenic to all livestock, causing mortali-
ty. Maggots penetrate into tissue where there iy
broken skin, Usually found in southern Texas onls.

 

Send larvae from wounds to state diagnestic

 

‘Treatment; Ivermectin, organophasphates.
Prevention: Release of sterile male flies.

Blowflies

Common name: Sheep blowflies or bottle flies (ercifict
Phoruzia, Callipbora, etc.); {Insecta-Diptera).
Larvae siz

 

Larvae (grubs) are up to 13 mm.

Importance: Responsible for myiasis “strike” in sheep.

Diagnosi

Treatment: Clean the wound and treat with organophos-
phates.

Prevention: Sanitation and management to prevent wet.
dirty wool — crutching, docking, shearing, ete.

 

Find larvae in rotting wool on sheep.

treatment of parasites and other organisms that
predispose to diarrhea; fly control.
Stg

Section 5

  

Oestrus ovis

Fig. 119. Qesérus ovis is in host for | month or through
the winter.

 

Musca autumnalis

 

g. 120. Musca antunmalis, Life cycle 5 variable, 10-14
days.

 

Musca domestica

 

Fig. 121. Musca domestica, Life cycle is variable, 10-14

days.

100

Oestris ovis

Common name: Sheep nasal bot fly (Insecta-Diptera).

 

Larvae size: Larvae up to 15 mm,

Importance: Causes nasal discharge and difficalry in
breathing. Adult flies frighten sheep and predis-
pose to reduced production,

Diagnosis: Clinical signs; observe larvae at necropsy.

‘Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mefky $C

Bacillus thuringiensis as an aerosol

Musca autunmalis

Common name: Face fly (Insecta-Diptera).

Adult sizey 6-9 mm,

Importance: Irritate the eyes and nostrils, may predis-
pose to bacterial keratoconjunctivitis “pink eye”,
transmit eyeworms (Thelaaia spp.}, and infectious
bovine rhinotracheitis.

 

  

Diagnosis: Identification of flies.

Treatment; See Table 27.

Prevention: Sanitation; feed larvacidal drags such as
methoprene or tetrachlorvinphos; insecticide-
impregnated ear tags; biological control methads,

Musca domestica

Common name: House fly (Insecta-Diptera}.
Adult size: 5-12 mn,
Importanee: Irritare cattle, cause reduced weight pas

 

and loss of production,

Diagnosis: Identification of flies.

See Table 27.

Prevention: Sanitation; feed larvacidal drugs such as

 

“Yreatmen

 

methoprene, tetrachlorvinphos, or chlorfenvin-
phos; insecticide-impregnated ear tags; biological
control methods.
 

Siphona (Haematobia) irritans

Fig. 122. Sipborta (Haentatobis) isritans. Life evele is 3
weeks or more.

 

Stomoxys calcitrans

Fig, 123. Stosox:
more.

 

calcitrans. Life cycle is 4 w

 

 

 

Fig, 124, Tabants spp. One generation per year.

101

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Sipbona (Haematobia) irritans

Common name: Horn fly (Insecta-Diptera).

Adult size: 4-5 mm.

Importance: Irritate cattle; occur in large numbers and
cause weight and bload loss, and reduce produc-
tion,

Diagnosis: Identification of adult fly. Size is smaller
than a house fly. Usually feed with head down.

Treatment: See Table 27.

 

  

Prevention; Ivermectin kills larvae in manure; metho-
prene as a feed additive; insecticide-impregnated
(fenvalemte, permethrin) ear tags; biological con-
trol.

Eprinomectin at 0.5 my/ky, as a pour on is effective.
Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg as a pour on is effective.

Stomoxys calcitrans

Common name: Stable fly (Insecta-Diptera),

Adult size: 7-8 mm.

Importance: These are persistent blood-sucking flies
thar bite and irritate cattle; cause reduced weight
gains and reduced feed eff

Diagnosis: Identification of adult fly. Size of a house fly,
but proboscis projects straight forward.

 

 

ne

     

‘Treatment: See Table 27.
Preventiot

 

Flies breed in rotting vegetation; therefore,
sanitation is helpful. Methoprene fed to animals
or use Bacillus thuringiensis.

Tabanus spp.

Common name: Horse fly (Insecta-Diptera).
Adult size: Up ta 30 mm.
Importance: Vicious biters, causing stampeding and re-

 

duction of weight gain. Transmit anaplasmosis,
ete.

Diagnosis: Identification of adult th.

Treatment: See Table 31.

 

YAY
 

Section 5

Haematopinus eurysternus

Fig. 125, Common lice found on ruminants.

BOVINE LICE

Solenopotes

capillatus

 

Linognathus vituli

Table 30. List of common lice found on cuminants

 
 
 
  
 
   

  

 

Genns and Species |
Mallophaga (biting lice)
Bovicola (Damalinia) spp.

 

Anoplura (sucking lice)
Haematopinus eurystermus
Linognathus africanus
Linognathus vituli
Linognathus stenopsis
Linognathus pedalis
Linognathus ovillus
Solenopotes capillatus

Common Name

Biting or chewing louse

Short-nosed cattle louse
African blue louse
Long-nosed cattle louse
Goat sucking louse

Sheep foot louse

Sheep face and body louse
Little blue cattle louse

 

102
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

    
   

 

“Fig. 126d, Life eycle Of a biting louse (about 4 weeks). ;
Wy = Fig. 126b. Bovicola (Darnalinia) bovis.
Bovicola (Damalinia) bovis

Common name: Biting louse (Insecta-Mallophaga) of Treatment: See Table 27. Usually dipping or high pressure
cattle, sheep, and goats. sprays Coumaphos, 25% wettable powder at 0.06%
Size of adult; 2-3 mm. Diazinon, 50% wettable powder at 0.03%
Importance; Cause irritation and weight loss; constant Cypermethrin, 2.5% as a pour on
scratching, licking, and biting affected areas. Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC
Most common in fall and winter. In cattle are Eprinomectin, 0.5 mg/kg as a pour on
usually on neck, brisket, head, and between legs. Moxideetin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Diagnosis: Examination of skin and hair for eggs, All animals must be treated simultaneously.

nymphs, and adult lice.

 

SP

Sucking Lice

  

Fig. 1272. Life cycle of a sucking louse (about 4 weeks).

. Fig. 127b. Linognathts sp.

Linognathus sp.

Common name: Sucking lice (Insecta-Anoplura} of cattle, sheep, and goats. Includes L. vituli (long-nosed or blue cattle
louse}; Haematopinus exrysternus (short-nosed cattle louse). In sheep, Lixognathus spp. are primarily on the legs.
Affected animals lick, scratch, and bite-affected areas.

Size of adult; 2,5-5.0 mm.

Importance: Cause irritation and weight loss; may cause anemia.

Diagnosis: Examine skin and hair for eggs, nymphs, and adults.

Treatment: See Table 27. All animals must be treated simultaneously.

103
ood

Section §

 

 

Dermacentor

ig. 128. Simpl

Capituluminfesior: scatum absent Capitulum anterior: scunum present
FAMILY ARGASIDAE ~ SOFT TICKS FAMILY IXODIDAE = HARD TICKS:

_eeepitulum

   

 

ventral Deval Female. dorsal Male. dorsal
‘Margin ofbody with definite Maigia of body thick, rounded, fedl groove either behind Anal groovelin front of anus
sututal toe. wthou definite surural Ke. anus, indistinct or absent

¢

 

 

ee
tHypostome with veldevek _Hyposiomevestigil or whe secsial sagen patel Te segment of papi kn
opediceth integument mamil- olneffectiverecthinregu- ineagoeaeet ally produced,
ined mon tuberculsted or granur
bated.
s ’
. a tizomepiysais
Ornithodoros Oloblus
Mouthparts mach longer than Foci tease asbass
basisantul Scan wtheys. cpt.
Base caput teraly pro- Bass rena 0% kteraly
cuced. produced
°
¥
,
Pai ‘eal Festoons absent. Palpinot ridged. Festoons present. Dermacentor
Intel
£
Boophilus Rhipicephalus

  

ied key to common ticks of animals and birds.

  

Ag
p
Ambylomma Ixodes Boophitus Rhipicephatus Haemaphysalis,

Fig. 129. Morphology of basis capitwlum and scutum of the major genera of ticks.

104
Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Hypostome

    
    
   

   
   

Basis capitulum
Cervical Groove
Eye

Lateral Groove

Omate Markings
Spiracular Plate

Basis capitulum fr
Genital Aperture
Genital Groove ef

Anus
‘Adanal Shield

Femur
Festoon
Tibia

Tarsus
Metatarsus

Fig, 130, Simplified morphology of a tick.

Table 31. Common ticks and mites of cattle

   

 

Common Name
Ticks Host
ni dog tick ¥3,

y Mountain wood tick

Winter tick

Genus and Species

 

Ameri

 

Dermacentor variabalis

    

 

Dermacentor aud

 
 

  

ersoni -
: Engorged “4
Female

 

Dermacentor albi,

Dermacentor occidentalis
Lxodes scapularis
Amblyomma americanum
Amblyomuna maculatin
Boopbilus annulatus
Boopbilus microplus
Otobius megnini
Ornithodorns cariacens
Mites
Psoroptes ovis
Sarcoptes seabei
Chorioptes bovis
Demodex bovis
Psorergates bos

Pacific coast tick
Black-lepged tick
Lone star tick
Gulf coast tick
Cattle tick
Southern cattle tick
Spinose ear tick
Pajoroello tick

Mange mite, scab mice

 

Mange mit
Mange mite
Mange mite
Itch mite

105

   

Fig. 131, Life cycle of a three-host tick.

 
otg

Section 5

 

Psoroptes sp.

Fig. 132a. Psoroptes sp. Life cycle is about 3 weeks.

 

Sarcoptes scabiei

 

 

133a. Surcoptes scabiei. Life cycle is about 3 weeks.

Chorioptes sp.

Vig. Baa. Choriaptes sp. Life

 

le is about 3 weeks.

106

Psoroptes sp.

Common name: Mange mite or seab mite of cattle,
sheep, and goats (Arachnida-Psoroptidae),
Adult size: 500 jim (male); 700 jum (female).
Importance: This is a reportable disease in cattle and
sheep in some states. It is very contagious and
highly pathogenic, causing dramatic weight loss.
Mites puncture skin and cause inflammation and
hair loss. Affected animals bite and scratch.
Affects cattle and sheep.
Diagnosis: Skin scraping at the periphery of the crusty
lesion. Mites have long, jointed pedicels.
Treatment; lyermectin 0.2 mg/kg SC; treat twice at 3-
week interval
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or 1M.
Mosidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour an

 

Sarcoptes scabiei

Common name: Mange mite of cattle and sheep
(Arachnida-Sarcoptidae).

Adult size: 250 pum {male}; 600 jam (female),

Importance: This is a reportable disease in cattle in
some states. Causes intensive itching.

Diagnosis: Skin scraping, Mites have long, nanjointed
pedicels.

‘Yrearment; Ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg SC; treat twice at 3-

week interval
:prinomectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM

 

 

 

Chorioptes sp.

Common name: Mange mite of cattle, sheep, and goats
(Arachnida-Psoroptidae).
Adult size: 250 jum {male}; 600 jam (female}.
Importance: This is a reportable disease in cattle in
some states. It is not as pathagenic as Psoroptes
or Sarcoptes, Causes tail or foot mange.
Diagnosis: Skin scraping, Mites have very short, un-
jointed pedicels.
Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC; treat twice at 3-
week interval
Dorameetin, 0.2 mg/kg $C or IM
Eprinomeetin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on
Moxidectin, 0.5 mg/kg pour on

 

 

 
‘Caitle, Sheep, and Goats

RE
a

Fig. 132c. Psoroptes sp. adult female with egg (large arrow}.
Inset shows jointed pedicels at ends of legs (smaller arrows).

 
   
   
  
 
     

Section 5

Psorergates sp.

Fig, 135a, Life cycle of Psorergates sp.

   
    
  
   

Diagnosis: Skin scrapings,
Treatment: Iverniectin, 0.2 ingékg SC i
Organophosphate sprays after shearing

 

Melophagus ovinus

Fig, 136b. Melophagas ovis.
Fig, 136a, Life cycle of Melophagus ovinus.

Melophagus ovinus

Common name: Sheep ked, erroneously called a sheep tick (Insecta-Diptera).
Adult size: 5-8 mm. Life cycle is about 3 months, adults live about 3 months.
Importance: Causes irritation, lesions to the skin (cockle}, anemia, wool loss, and reduction in weight gain:
Diagnosis: Visual observation of wool for pupae and adults. as
Treatment: Spray applications of trichlorphon, coumaphos, crotoxy phos, fenchlorphas, tetrachlorvinphos, phosmet,
Ivermectin, 0.2 mgfkg SC. Treat after shearing because shearing removes a majority of the keds"

 

108

 
Bibliography
Nematodes

Anderson N: The efficiency of levamisole, thiabenda-
zole and fenbendazole against naturally acquired in-
fections of Ostertagia ostertagi in cattle, Res Vet Sei
23:298-302, 1977.

Armour J; Bovine ostertagiasis: A review. Vet Ree
86:184-190, 1970.

Armour J; Parasitic gastroenteritis in cattle. Vet Ree
95:391-395, 1974.

Armour J, Bruce RG: Inhibited development of
Ostertagia ostertagi infections: A diapause phenome-
non in a nematode. Parasitology 60:16 1-174, 1974,

Armour J, Bairden K, Preston JM: Anthelmintic effi-
ciency of ivermectin against naturally occurring gas-

 

 

trointestinal nematodes of sheep. Vet Rec
111:809-81, 1982.

Baker NF, Fisk RA, Bushnell RB, et al.
rence of infective nematode larvae on irrigated pas-
ture grazed by cattle in California. Am J Ver Res
42:1 188-1191, 1981.

Barger 1A, Gibbs H!
ed experimentally with trichostrongylid parasites.
Vet Parasitol 9:69-73, 1981.

Beckland WAV: Revised check list of internal and exter-
nal parasites of domestic animals in the United
States and possessions and in Canada. Am } Vet Res
25:1380-1416, 1964.

Bliss HD, Todd AC: Milk production by Vermont dairy
cattle after deworming. Vet Med Small Anint Clin
$1:125 1-1254, 1976.

Bromsdon RY: The seasonal variations in the nematode

 

Seasonal oceur-

 

  

': Milk production of cows infect

 

egg counts of sheep comparison of the spring rise
phenomenon in breeding and anmated ewes. NZ Vet
£ 12:75-80, 1966.

Coman RM: The post parturient rise in fecal nematade
egg counts of ewes: Its aetiology and epidemiological
significance. World Rev Anim Prod 4 $8, 1968.

Courmey CH, Sumdlof SF: Veterinary Antiparasitic

   

Drugs, A Compreshensire Compendiin of EDA-
Approved Antiparasitic Drugs, American
Association of Veterinary Parasitologists Publication,
S$P96, University of Florida, Gainesville, 224 pages,
1991.

Craig TM: Seasonal transmission of bovine gastroin-
testinal nematodes in the Texas Gulf Coast. f Ant
Vet Med Assoe 174:844-847, 1970.

Donakl AD, Morley FHW, Waller PH, et al.: Effects of
reproduction, genotype and anthelmintic treatment

 

of ewes on Ostertagia spp. populations. Int Parasitol
12:403-4 11, 1982.

Foreyt WJ, Wescott RB, Johnson R, et al.: Treatment
for hmgworms (Prostostrongylus spp.) in Rocky

109

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Mountain bighorn sheep. Vet Med Sniall Ain Clin
78:1435-1439, 1983,

Gibbs HC: Gastrointestinal nematodiasis in dairy cat-
tle. f Dairy Sci 65: 2182-2188, 1981.

Gibbs HC: Mechanisms of survival of nematode para-
sites with emphasis on hypobiosis. Ver Parasitul
11:25+48, 1982.

Gibbs HC: Relative importance of winter survival of
larval nematodes in pasture and infected carrier
calves in a study of parasitic gastroenteritis in calves.
Am } Vet Res 40:227-231, 1979.

Gibbs HC, Kitsos A: Efectiveness of a slow release,
morantel tartrate authelmintic bolus for controlling,
parasitic gastroenteritis in replacement dairy heifers.
Am } Vet Res 46:2241 44, 1985.

Goudie C, Evans NA, Gration KA, et al: Doramectin:
a potent novel endectacide, Ver Parasitol 49:5-15,
1993.

Gregory E, Foreyt WJ, Breeze R: Efficacy of ivermectin
and fenbendazole against mgworms. Vet Med
80:1 14-117, 1985

Grisi L, Todd AC: Prevalence of gastrointestinal para-
sites among milking cows in Wisconsin,
Pennsylvania, and North Carolina. Anz J Vet Res
39:51-54, 1978.

Guichon PT, Jim GK, Booker CW, et al: Relative cost-
effectiveness of treatment of feedlot calves with iver-
meetin versus treatment with a combination of fen-
bendazole, permethrin, and fenthion, J Am Vet Med
Assoc 216:1965-1969, 2000.

Gupta RP, Gibbs HC: Epidemiological investigations
on Dietyocaulus viviparus (Block, 1782) infection in
cattle. Can Vet J 11:149-156, 1970.

Hammerberg B, Lamm WD: Changes in periparturient
fecal egg counts in beef cows calving in the spring,
Ain J Vet Res 41:1686-1689, 1980.

Herd RP: A practical approach to parasite control in
dairy cows and heifers. Compend Contimting Ed
3:73-80, 1983.

Herd RP, [leider LE:
dairy replacement heifers by two treatments in the
spring. J Am Vet Med Assoc 177:51-54, 1980.

Herd RP, Parker CE, McClure KE: Epidemiologic ap-
proach to the control of sheep nematodes. J Az Vet
Med Assoc 184:680~G687, 1984.

Herd RP, Riedel RM, Heider LE: Identification and epi-
demiologic significance of nematades in a dairy
barn, J Amt Vet Med Assoe 176:1370-1373, 1980.

Herlich H: The effects of the intestinal worms,

 

   

  

 

 

 

 

Control of internal parasites in

    

Cooperia pectinata and Cooperia oncopbora on ex-
perimentally infected calves, Arn J Vet Res
26:1032-1035, 1965.

Herlich II: ‘the importance of helminth infections in
ruminants. World Anim Rev 26:22-26, 1978.

  

aay
SLA

Section 5

 

Kennedy T], Todd AC: Eificacy of fenbendazole against
gastrointestinal parasites of sheep. Alm J Ver Res
36: 1465-1467, 1975

Lyons ET, Drudge JE: Two eye worms Thelazia gulusa
and Thelasia skrjabixi in cattle in Kentucky, J
Parasital G1:1119-1122, 1975,

Malezewski A, Westcott RB, Spratling BM, et a
Internal parasites of Washington cattle. Am} Vet
Res 36:1671-1675, 1975.

Randall RW, Gibbs H
cal gastrointestinal helminthiasis on digestion and
energy metabolism in calves, vt J Vet Res
42:1730-1734, 1981,

Robers JL, Swan RA: Quantitative studies of ovine
haemonchosis I. Relationship between fecal exe
cots and total worm counts, Ver Parasitol
8:165-171, 1981.

Ross 1G, Dow
abomasal lesion in calves experimentally infected

 

 

 

 

fects of clinical and subelini-

 

Phe course and development of the

with the nematode parasite Ostertagia ostertagi. Br
Vet f12 233, 196.

Smith 1], Archibald RN
of ovine gastrointestinal parasites in the maritime
provinces, Can Vet  6:257-267, 1965,

Theodorides VJ, Nawalinski T, Chang J: Efficacy of al-
bendazole against Haemouchus, Nematudirus,
Dictyocantus, and Moniezia of sheep. Ai J Vet Res
37:15 15-1516, 1976.

Thomas RJ, Ali DA: The effect of Haemonchus contar-
tus infection of the pregnant and lactating ewe, Lit f
Parasitol 11:393-398, 1983.

“Yodd KS, Mansfield ME, DiPetro JA: Anthelmintic effi-
cacy of avermectin B,, and dihydroavermectin By,
against ovine gastrointestinal nematodes in 1977.
Am } Vet Res 45:976-977, 1984.

‘Yunnicliffe EA: The occurrence of Cooperia oncophora
and Nematodiris helvetianus in calves. } Am Vet
Med Assoc 33:250-241, 1932.

Wescort RB, LeaMaster BR:
against naturally acquired and experimentally in-
duced nematode infections in sheep. Av J Vet Res
43:531-533, 1982,

Williams JC, Know JW, Baumann BA, et al.: Seasonal
changes of gastrointestinal nematode populations in

 

 

‘The overwinter survival

 

 

 

 

 

“fficacy of ivermectin

yearling beef cattle in Louisiana with emphasis on
prevalence of inhibition of Ostertagia ostertagi. Int J
Parasitol 13:133-143, 1983.

Williams JC, Lovacano AF, DeRosa A, et al.: A com-
parison of persistent anthelmintic efficacy of topical
formulations of doramectin, ivermectin, epti-
nomectin and moxidectin against naturally acquired
nematode infections of beef calves. Vet Parasitol

77-288, 1999,

Williams JC, Nault C, Ramsey RT, et al.: Effie:

 

 

110

Cydectin mosiclectin 1% injectable against experi-
mental infestations of Dicyocaulus viviparous and
Bunostomuin phlebotomum superimposed on natu-
ral gastrointestinal infections in calves, Vet Parasitol
43:293-299, 1992,

Williams JC, Sheehan DS, Fuselier RH, et al.:
Experimental and natural infection of calves with
Bunostomum phlebotomunt, Vet Parasitol
13:225-237, 1983.

Yaawinski T, Tucker C, Copeland §, Yazwinsk
Guerino F: Dose confirmation of moxidectin pour-
on against natural nematode infections of lactating,
dairy cows, Vet Parasitol 86:223-228, 1999.

  

   

Trematodes

Armour J: The epidemiology and control of bovine fas-
cioliasis, Vet Rec 96:198-201, 1975.

Boray JC, Crowfoot PD, Strong MB, et al.: Treatment
of immature and mature Fasciola hepatica infections
in sheep with triclabendazole, Vet Ree 113:315-317,
1983.

Craig TM, Bell RR: Seasonal transmission of liver
flukes to cattle in the Texas gulf coast. J Aut Vet
Med Assoc 173:104-107, 1978.

Craig TM, Huey Riz Efficacy of triclabendazole
against Fasciola hepatica and Fascioloides magna in
naturally infected calves. Amt J Vet Res
45:1644-1645, 1984.

Dargie ID, Berry Cl, Parkins ||: ‘The pathophysiology
of ovine fascioliasis: Studies on the feed intake and
digestibility, body weight and nitrogen balance of
sheep given rations of hay or hay plus a pelleted
supplement, Res Vet Sei 26:289-295, 1979.

Doyle JJ: Acquired immunity to experimental infection
with Fasciola bepatica in cattle, Res Vet Sci
12:527-S34, 1971.

Farrell hen DT, Wescott RB, et al.: An enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay for diagnosis of
Fasciola hepatica infection in cattle, Aut} Vet Res
42:237-240, 1981,

Foreyt W}: Experimental infection of Symnaeid snails in
Wisconsin with miracidia of Fascioloides magna and
Fasciola hepatica. | Parasitol 64:1132-1134, 1978,

Foreyt WJ, Foreyt KM: Albendazole treatment of ex-
perimentally induced Fascioloides magna infection in
goats, Vet Med Small Anim Clinic 75:1441-1444,
1980.

Foreyt WJ, Hunter Rl: Clinical Fascioloides magna in-
fection in sheep in Oregon on pasture shared by
Columbian white-tailed deer, Anz_f Vet Res
41:1531-1532, 1980.

Foreyt W], ‘Todd AC: Development of the large
American liver fluke Fuscioloides magna in white-

 

 

  

 

   

 

  
tailed deer, cattle, and sheep. J Parasitol 62:26-32,
1976.

Foreyt W], Todd AG: Liver flukes in cattle: Prevalence,
distribution and experimental treatment. Ver Med
Small Anim Clin 71;816-822, 1976.

Hjerpe CA, Tennant BC, Crenshaw GL, et al: Ovine
fascioliasis in California. } Ant Vet Med Assoc
159:1266-1271, 1971.

Hoover RC, Lincoln JD, Hall RE, et al:
mission of Fasciola hepatica to cattle in northwest-
ern United States. J Ant Vet Med Assoc 184:69.

Krull WH, Mapes CR: Studies on the biology of
Dicrocoelium dendritic (Rudolphi, 1819) Looss,
1899 (Trematoda: Dicrocoeliidae), including its rela-
tion to the intermediate host, Cionella lubrica
(Muller). IX Notes on the cyst, metacercariae, and
infection in the ant, Formica fusca. Cornell Vet
44:389-410, 1954.

Leathers CW, Foreyt WJ, Fetcher A, et al.: Clinical Fas-
cioliasis in domestic goats in Montana. f Ant Vet
Med Assoc 180:1451-1454, 1982.

Malone JB, Loyacano A, Armstrong DA, et al: Bovine
fascioliasis: Economic impact and contre] in Gulf
coast cattle based on seasonal transmission. Bovine
Pract 17:126-133, 1982.

Malone JB, Ramsey RT, Loyacano AF: Efficacy of clor-
sulon against 8 week-old experimentally induced
and mature naturally acquired Fasciola bepatica in
cattle. Ant J Vet Res 45:851-854, 1984.

Malone JB, Smith PH, Loyacano A, et ali: Efficacy of
albendazole For treatment of naturally acquired
Fasciola hepatica in calves. Am | Vet Res
43:879-881, 1982.

Olsen OW: Longevity of metacercariae of Fasciola be-
patica on pastures in the upper coastal region of
‘Texas and its relationship to liver luke control. J
Parasitol 33:36-42, 1947.

Price EW: The fluke situation in American ruminants, J
Parasitol 39:1 19-134, 1953.

Symons LEA, Boray JC: The anemia of acute and
chronic ovine fascioliasis. Z Tropenmed Parasit
19:45 1-472, 1968.

Vermunt}}, West DM, Pomroy WE: Multiple resistance
to ivermectin and oxfendazole in Cooperia species of
cattle in New Zealand. Vet Ree 137:43-45, 1995.

Wescott RB, Farrell CJ, Shen DT: Diagnosis of natural-
ly occurring Fasciola bepatica infections in cattle
with an ELISA test. Ani { Vet Res 45:1 78-179,
1984,

 

Seasonal trans-

 

  

  

Protozoa

Abbit B, Meyerhok. GW: Trichomonas foetus infection
of range bulls in south Florida. Vet Med Srall

111

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Animal Clin 74:1339-1342, 1979.

Baker NF, Walters G1, Fish RA: Amprolium For control
of coccidiosis in feedlot lambs. Ant J Vet Res
33:83-86, 1972.

Barr BC, Rowe JD, Sverlow KW, et al: Experimental
reproduction of bovine fetal Neospora infection and

 

death with a bovine Neospora isolate. J Vet Diagn
favest 6:207, 1994.

Bergstrom RC, Maki LR: Coccidiostatic action of mon-
ensin fed to lambs: Body weight gains and feed con-
version efficacy. Ant | Vet Res 37:79-81, 1976.

Bergstrom RC, Maki LR: Effect of monensin in young
crossbred lambs with naturally occurring coccidiosis,
[Am Vet Ned Assoc 165: 288-289, 1974.

Beverly JKA, Watson WA: Prevention of experimental

 

and naturally occurring ovine abortion due to toxo-
plasmosis. Vet Rec 88:39-41, 1971.

Blewett DA, Watson WA: The epidemiology of ovine
toxoplasmosis. If Possible sources of infection in
outbreaks of clinical disease. Br Vet J 139:546-555,
1983.

Clark BL, Parsonson IM, White ME, et al.: Control of
trichomoniasis in large herd of beef cattle. Aust Vet }
30:424-425, 1974.

Davison H, Otter A, Trees AJ: Estimation of vertical
and horizontal transmission parameters of Neospora
caninum infections in dairy cattle. but { Parasitol
29:1683, 1999.

Dubey JP: A review of Sarcocystis of domestic animals
and of other coccidia of cats and dogs. } Ant Vet
Med Assoc 169:1061-1078, 1976.

Dubey JP: Ej
abortion in dairy goats in Montana. ] Ant Vet Med
Assoc 178:661-670, 198L

Dubey JP: plasma, Hammrondia, Sarcocystis,
Besnoitia and other tissue cyst-Forming coccidia of

 

izootic toxoplasmosis associated with

 

 

man and animals. In Kreier, JP, (ed): Parasitic
Protozoa, New York, Academic Press, 1977, pp
101-237.

Dubey JP: Toxoplasma-induced abortion in dairy goats.
| Am Vet Med Assoc 178:671-674, 198L

Dubey JP: Neosporosis in cattle: biology and economic
impact. J Ant Vet Med Assoc 214:1160, 1999.

Dubey JP: Recent advances in Neospora and neosporo-
sis. Vet Parasitol 84:349, 1999,

Dubey JP, Kirkbride CA: Epizootics of ovine abortion
due to Toxoplasma gondii in north central United
States. J Ant Vet Med Assoc 184:657-660, 1984.

Dubey JP, Lindsay DS, Anderson ML, et al Induced
transplacental transmission of Neospora canimun in
cattle. J Ant Vet Med Assoc 201:709, 1992.

Dubey JP, Speer CA, Epling GP: Sarcocystosis in new-
born calves fed Sarcocystis cruzi sporacysts from
coyotes. Amt f Vet Res 43:2147-2164, 1982.

 

YAY
Std

Section 5

 

Dubey JP, Weishrode SE, Speer CA, et al
in goats: Clinic signs and pathologic and hematolog-
ic findings. | Am Vet Med Assoe 178:683-699,
1981.

Fayer R, Reid WM: Control of coccidiosis. In Long PE
(ed): The Biology of the Coccidia. Baltimore,
Maryland, University Park Press, 1982.

Fitzgerald PR, Manstield ME:
of the antibiotic monensin against Eimeria ni-
nakoblyakimovae and other natwally occurring coc-
cidia of sheep. Au f Vet Res 37:7-10, 1978.

Fitzgerald PR, Johnson AE, [Hammond DM: Treatment
of genital trichomoniasis in bulls. Au f Vet Res
143:259-262, 1963.

Foreyt WJ, Gates NL, Rich J
in salt against ovine cocci
42:54-56, 1981.

Foreyt WJ, Gates NL, Wescott RB: Effects of lasalocid
and monensin against experimentally induced coc-

 

Sarcocystosis

 

Effect

 

Ovine coccidiosis:

 
 

valuation of lasalocid
Am | Vet Res

cidiosis in confinement-reared lambs from weaning
to market weight. Av } Vet Res 40:97-100, 1979.

Foreyt WJ, Parish SM, Foreyt KM: Lasalocid for im-
proved weight gains and control of caccidia in
lambs. Ai J Vet Res 42:57-60, 1981.

Gasparini G, Vaghi M, Tardani T: Treatment of bovine
trichomoniasis with metronidazole. Ver Ree
75:940-943, 1963.

Hammond DM, Kuta JE, Miner ML; Amprolium for
control of experimental coccidiosis in lambs. Cornell
Vet 57:611-623, 1967.

Horton GMJ, Stockdale PHG: Effects of amprotium
and monensin on oocyst discharge, feed utilization
and rumen metabolism of lambs with coccidiosis.
“un J Vet Res 40:966-970, 1979.

Kirkpartrick CE, Farrell JP: Cryptosporidiosis.
Compend Continuing Ed 6:154-165, 1984.

Leek RG, Fayer R, Johnson AT: Sheep experimentally
infected with Sarcocystis from dogs: I. Disease in
young lambs. f Parasitol 63:642-650, 1977.

Leek RG, Fayer R, McLoughlin DK; Effect of mon-
ensin on experimentally infections of Eimeria ni-
nakoblyakinovae in lambs. Aim | Vet Res
37:339-34 1, 1976.

Levine ND, Ivens V: The Coccidian Parasites
(Protozoan: Sporozna) of Ruminants. Minois
Biology Monograph No. 44, Urban, Ilinois,
University of Illinois Press, 1970.

Levine ND, Ivens V, % imeria christenseni sp.
n and other coccidia (Protozoa: Eimeriidae) of the
goat, f Parasitol 48:255-269, 1962.

Lima JD: Eimeria caprina sp. n. from the domestic
goat, Capra hircus, from the USA. { Parasitol
65:902-903, 1979.

Lima JD: Life cycle of Eimeria christenseni Levine,

   

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

  

112

Ivens & Fritz, 1962 from the domestic goat, Capra
hireus. L. {| Protozool 27:59-64, 1981.

Long MI’, Baszler ‘FV: Fetal loss in BALB/C mice infect-
ed with Neospora caninun. | Parasitol 82:608,
1996,

McDougal LR: Attempted cross-transmission of coc-
cidia between sheep and goats and description of
Eineria ovinoidalis sp. n. } Protozool 26:109-113,
1979.

MeLonghlin DK: Dimetridazole, a systemic treatment

ral adminis-

  

 

 

for bovine venereal trichomoniasis I:
tration. f Parasitol 51:835-836, 196.

Morgan BB: Bovine trichomonias: inneapolis,
Minnesota, Burgess Publishing Co., 1944,

O'Handley RM, Olson ME, McAllister TA: Efficacy of
fenbendazole for treatment of giardiasis in calves.
Ant } Vet Res S8:384-388, 1997,

Olson ME, Guselle NII, O'Handley RM, et al: Giardia
and Cryptosporidium in dairy calves in British
Columia. Can Vet f 38:703-706, 1997.

Parsonson IM, Clark BL, Dufty J: The pathogenesis of
‘Tritricbomonas foetus infection in the bull. Aust Vet
J 50:421-523, 1984.

Pellerdy LP: Coccidia and Coccidiosis. Berlin, Parey,
1974.

Pout DD: Coccidiosis of sheep: A review, Ver Ree
98:340-341, 1976.

Radostits OM: Stockdale PHG: A brief review of
bovine coccidiosis in western Canada. Cant Vet J
21:227-230, 1980.

Samizadeh-Yazd A, Rhodes CN, Todd AC: Ovine coc-
cidiosis, Comparison of the effects of monensin and

idia. Ain f

  

  

  

 

 

 

 

atreomycin on lambs infected with coc

Vet Res 40:1107-1109, 1979.

Helminths, Arthropods and Protozoa of

cated Animals. Edition 7. London, Bailliere
Tindall, 1982.

Thurmond MC, Hietala SK: Effect of congenitally ac-
quired Neospora canintun infection on risk of abor-
tion and subsequent abortions in dairy cattle. Anz f
Vet Res 58:1381, 1997.

Wilson SK, Kocan AA, Gandy ET, et al: The preva-
lence of trichomoniasis in Oklahoma beef bulls.
Bovine Pract 14:109-110, 1979.

Wouda W, Moen AR, Schukken YH: Abortion risk in
progeny of cows after a Neospora caninun epidem-
ic. Theriogenology 49:1311, 1998.

Xiao L, Saeed K, Flerd RP: Efficacy of albenclazole and
fenbendazole against Giardia infection in cattle. Vet
Parasitol 6 5-170, 1996.

 
 

 

 

External Parasites

Bequaert J: A monograph of the Melopbaginae, or ked
flies, of sheep, goats, deer and antelope (Diptera,
Hippoboscidae). Enottomo Ant 22:1~220, 1942,

Desch CE Jr., Hoogstraal H, Nutting WB: Biology of
ticks (Metastigmata: Ixodida). In Nutting WB (ed):
Maminalian Diseases and Arachnids, vol 1. Boca
Raton, Florida, CRC Press, Inc., 1984, pp 111-140,

Drummond RO, George JE. Kimz SF: Control of
Arthropod Pests of Livestock: A Review of
Technology. CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, FL, 1988,
245 pages.

Drummond RO, Lambert G, Smalley HE Jr, et al
Estimated losses of livestock to pests. Ins CRC
Handbook of Pest Management in Agriculture.
Volume 1. Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press, 1981,

Foil LD, Hogsette J\: Biology and control of tabanids,
stable flies ancl horn flies. Rev Sei Tecls
13:1125-1138, 1994,

Gugliclmone AA, Mangold AJ, Munoz C, et al:
Moxidectin pour-on for control of natural popula~
tions of the cattle tick Boophilis microplus
(Acarina: [xodiae}. Vet Parasitol 87:237-241, 2000,

Harwood RE James MT: Entomology ia Haman and
Animal Health. MacMillan, New York, 1979,

 

 

113

Parasites of Cattle, Sheep, and Goats

Hourrigan JU: Spread and detection of psoroptie sca-
bies of cattle in the United States. J Amr Ver Med
Assoe 175:1278~1280, 1979,

Keirans JE, Clifford CM: The genus Ixodes in the
United States: A scaring electron microscope stud:
and key to the adults. J Met Entomol (Suppl)

1-14, 1978.

McLaughlin RE, Addison EM: Tick (Dermacentor al-
bipictus)-induced winter hair loss in captive moose
{Alces alces). } Wildl Dis 22:502-510, 1986.

Steelman CD; Effects of extemal and intemal arthro-
pod parasites on domestic livestock production. Az
Rev Entomol 21:166-178, 1976.

Strickland RK, Gerrish RR, Hourrigan JL, et als
of Veterinary Lmportance, no. 485. Washington,
D.C., Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service,
US. Department of Agriculture, 1976, p. 122.

Williams RE, Hall RD, Broce AB, et al. (eds): Livestock
Entomology. John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1985.

Wright FC, Guilliot FS, Meleney WP: Transmission of
psoroptic mites from bighor sheep (Quis canadensis

 

AQY

   

 

 

ficks

 

mexicana) to domestic sheep, cattle and rabbits. |
Wild! Dis 17:381-386, 1981,
 

    
    

Haemonchus sp. Ostenagla sp. Tichastrongyiis sp. Camelostrongylis sp. Gesophagostomum sp.
80x43 80x43 85x40ym 80-8 m 80x40pm

   

$0 xm

 

Eimeria famae 50 xen
38x28 1m

 

Capilaria
30x30 pm

         
 

 

 

gn tela Fania napatea Ta ee eae wena
37, Common parasite eggs and oocysts found in lama feces.
ccidia in Llamas
2. Species of caccidia (Eimeria) in lamas*

Size (Lim) Prepatent Period

26 x21 “T6-18 days

38x28 . 15-16 days

92 x 67 33-34 days

21x18 10 days

 

115

 
y

Section 6

Location of Major Parasites

  
 
  

PARASITES OF LLAMAS
Cephenemyia
Camelostrongylus
Haemonchus

Ostestagia
Trichostrongylus
Marchallagia

 
 

Brain and Spinal Cord]

 

  
    
  

meningeal worm

  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 

 

Lice Damalinia

Geeum and Coton

 
    
 
 
  
 

 

 

 
 

Microthoracius
Cesophagostomum Mites Chorioptes
Trichuris Sarcoptes
Capillaria
Trichostrongylus
Cooperia Fasciola
Nematodirus Fascioloides
Strongyloides
Moniezia
Giardia
Eimeria ‘Sarcocystis
Cryptosporidium (Pseudocyst)
Toxoplasma
. ; (Pseudocyst)
Fig. 138. Locations of the major parasites found in Hamas.
Drugs
Table 33. Anthelminties used commonly in Hamas
Ding Dosage Parasites Affected
Albendazale 10 mpfky Liver flakes, gastrointestinal nematodes, hmgworms
Clorsulon 7 myky Liver flukes
Doramectin 0.2 mgfky Gastrointestinal nematodes, hmgworms, external parasites
Fenhendazole 10 mgfky q 24hx3d Cestodes, gastrointestinal nematodes, hmgworms
Ivermectin. 0.2 mgfky Gastrointestinal nematodes, himgworms, sarcoptic
mange, sucking lice
Levamisole 5-8 mg/kg, Gastrointestinal nematodes, hingworms
Mebendazole 22 mpfky gq 24hx 3d Gastrointestinal nematodes
Pyrantel pamoate 18 mefky q 24h x 1-3 d Gastrointestinal nematodes

 

116
 
  
    
      
 
 
 

Parasites of Llamas

Cooperia,
i nim, Ostertagia,
and Trichostrongylit

Common nainé: Strongyles.
Size of eggs: 77 jun: x/45 jin
Importance: Thesé ‘ave the most prevale
Hamas. Clinical sighs of infection ar
growth, emaciation, and diarrhea. Preval
highest in young. :

 
 

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.

Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO

2 Fenbendazole, 10 mg/kg. q 24x 3 d PO

| He 159. Typical strongyle eggs. Prepatent period is 17-36 Ivermectin or doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM.
days! Levamisole, 5-8 mgfkg SC, PO

Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg q 24h x 3.d PO

Pyrantel pamoate, 18 mg/kg q 24 x 1-3 PO

 
 

   
  

    

Trichuris tenuis

Common name: Whipworm.

Size of egg: 64 jum x 32 um.

Importance: Poor growth, diarrhea.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.

Treatment: Efficacy is unknown. Recommendations are

treatment with: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO

Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM
Fenbendazole, 10-15 mg/kg q 24h x 3d PO

< Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC

# al

Fig. 140. Trichuris tenuis. Prepatent period is unknown.

 

Capillavia spp.

Common name: Capillary worm (at least two species}.
Size of egg: 50 wm x 30 jim, 75 pm x 40 pm.
Importance: Unknown, Low prevalence on fecal analy-
sis, high prevalence upon necropsy.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
Treatmeiitt: Efficacy is unknown. Recommendations in-
chide treatment with: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM
Fenberidazole, 10-15 mg/kg q 24h x 3d PO
Iverniectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC

Fig; 141, Capillaria sp. Prepatent period is known.

117

 
Section 6

 

 

Fig. 142, Nematodirus battus (arrow¥N. belvetianus.
Prepatent period is 2~3 weeks_

vl 2

Se a
v a

a
a a

ah
at
HE Ae
a

 

ae Prepatent per

   
   
    
      
  
   
  
   
 
   
  
  
   
   
  

Nematodirus battus=N¢ hel

Common name: Thin-1
Size of egg: 200 pm x 90 }u NE
Importance: Common in Ilaifiae’ esp
es poor growth, diarrhea: 4 i
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation’
Treatment: Albendazole, 10 mg/kg,
Doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM
Fenbendazole, 10 mg/kg q 24h x34
Ivermectin, 0.2 mgfkg SC
Levamisole, 5~8 mg/kg SC, PO
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg q 24 hx 3 d PO

Pyrantel pamoate, 18 mg/kg q 24h x 1-3 d PO

 

Eimeria lamae

Common name: Caccidia.
Size of oocysts: 38 jum x 28 jim.
Importance: Very common in Iamas, especially young.
Causes diarrhea and poor growth, especially in
Mamas less than 4 months old.
Diagnosis: Oocysts in fecal flotation (see Table 32).
Treatment: Amprolium, 10 mg/kg PO q 24h x 5-21 d
Sulfamethazine, 0.5% in feed; or 130 mg/kg PO, then
65 mefkg q 12hx4d
Prevention: Decoquinate, 0.5 mg/kg PO q 24 x 28+ d
Lasalocid, 1 mg/kg PO q 24x 30+ d
Monensin, 0.25 mg/kg PO in feed q 24x 31
Sulfaguanidine, 0.2% of feed

Cryptosporidiium sp.

Common name: Crypto.

Size of oocyst: 5 um x 6 pm.

Importance: Uncommon in llamas, but our laboratory ,
has seen Cryptosporiditan associated diarrhea ir
neonatal Hamas and weaned Mamas. Diarrhea in,
young less than 30 days of age is most common:
Note: Cryptosporidisn can infect humans.

Diagnosis: Oocysts in fecal flotation.

Treatment: None. Prevention through sanitation is
helpful.

 

 
 
   
  
 
  
   
       
   
 
   
 
    
   

Parasites of Llamas

Causes itching, restlessnies
growth, ues
Diagnosis: Direct observatioi
dorsal midline and ruinp; Exatni
light is helpful. me
Treatment: Treat all animals simultaneoii
Coumaphos, dust, spray :
Fenvalerate, spray
Invermectin-type products
(See Table 27 for complete list.)

  

jaalinia sp. (biting lice). Life
roxiniately 3 weeks.

Microtboracius sp.

Common name: Sucking lice.

Size of adult; 2-5 mm.

Importance; Common in lamas, especially in winter.
Causes itching, restlessness, hair loss, and poor
growth.

Diagnosis: Direct observation of hair, especially along
dorsal midline and rump. Examining with a flash-
light is helpful.

Treatment: Treat all animals simultaneously.

Coumaphos, dust, spray
Fenvalerate, spray

sy ee Invermectin-type products

ig. 146. Microthoracius sp. (sucking (See Table 27 for complete list.)

lice). Life cycle is approximately 3 weeks.

 

Sarcoptes scabiei

Common name: Sarcoptic mange mite.
Size of adult: 250-600 pm.
Importance; Was very common, but prevalence is de-

 

creasing, probably due to use of ivermectin.
Causes alopecia on face, neck, and other areas;
pruritus.

Diagnosis: Deep skin scraping at edge of lesion.
Observe mites microscopically.

Treatment: Treat all animals simultaneously.

Ivermectin or doramectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC; repeat in. =

10-14 d. eo

 

 

Fig. 4 ‘Saveoptes ‘scabies (mange mites).
if is approximately: 3 Weeks.

  
 

Fig. 148. Meningeal warm larvae in spinal cord. Prepatent
period is 90 + 9 clays in deer. Larvae are approximately 50
im in diameter.

Parelapbostrongylus tenuis

Common name: Meningeal worm or brain worm.

Size of larvae: Less than 100 yam in diameter in CN!

Importance: This parasite is fomd normally in white-
tailed deer in the Eastern USA and Canada. When
larvae in snails are ingested by Hamas, the para-
site migrates into the spinal cord and brain and
usually kills the Hama. Paralysis and incoordina-
tion are seen before death. Larvae cause severe in-
flammation to the CNS. Death usually occurs
30-60 days after infection. (See references.)

Diagnosis: Evaluation of CNS fluid; eosinophilia is
present. At necropsy larvae are seen histologically
in spinal cord and brain.

Treatment; Ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg SC at 14-day intervals
‘may prevent most larvae from causing significant
dantage. Iverniectin treatment should be initiated
before transmission of lavvaeoccurs. Once lesions

“develop, damage is irreversible:

 

 

 

Bibliography

Baumgarmer W, Zajac A, Hull BL, et al:
Parelaphostrongylosis in Hamas. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 187:1243-1245, 1985.

Bishop JK, Rickard LG: Fecal survey of lamas (Lama
glama) in Oregon: Incidental recovery of
Nematodirus battus. J Am Vet Med Assoc
191:1579-1581, 1987,

    
    
 
  
 
 
    

Brown TT, Jr, Jordan HE, Deviorest
parelaphostrongylosis in Hanias. J
14:441-444, 1978,
Conboy GA, O’Brien TD, Stevens DLE A,
tion of Fascioloides magna in a Mama {L.
J Parasitol 74:345-346, 1988, ae

Cornick JJ: Gastric squamous cell carcinoma and 2
oliasis in a Hama. Cornell Vet 78:235-241, 198:

Foreyt WJ, Lagerquist J: Experimental infections oF

Eimeria alpacae and Eimeria punoensis in Vamas

{Llama glama). J Parasitol 78:906-909, 1992.

Foreyt WJ, Rickard LG, Dowling $, Parish $, Pipas M:
Experimental infections of two Hamas with the
meningeal worm (Parelaphostrongylus tenuis). | Zoo
and Wild! Med 22:339-344, 1991,

Fowler ME: Medicine and surgery of South American
camelids: Llama, alpaca, vicuna, guanaco. lowa
State University Press, Ames, lowa, 1989,

Fowler ME, Paul-Murphy J: Cephenemyia sp. infesta-
tion in the Nama. Calif Vet 39:10-12, 1985.

Hodgin C, Schillhorn van Veen TW, Fayer R, et al:
Leptospirosis and coccidial infection in a guanaco. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 185:1442-1444, 1984,

Kiorpes AL, Kirkpatrick CE, Bowman DD: Isolation of
Giardia from a lama and from sheep. Can J Vet Res
$1:277-280, 1987.

Krogdah] DW, Thilsted JP, Olsen SK. Ataxia and hy-
permetria caused by Paralaphostrongylus tenuis in-
fection in Hamas. J Am Vet Med Assoc
190:191-193, 1987,

Lamn DP, Hinchcliff KW: Cerebrospinal fluid
eosinophilia and ataxia in five Hamas. Vet Rec
124:302-305, 1989.

OBrien T, O'Leary TP, Leininger JR, et al.:
Cerebrospinal parelaphostrongylosis in Minnesota.
Minn Vet 26:18-22, 1986.

Rickard LG, Bishop JK: Prevalence of Eimeria spp.
(Apicomplexa: Eimeriidae) in Oregon lamas. J
Protozool 35:33$-336, 1988,

Rickard LG, Bishop JK: Redescription of Trichuris
tenuis Chandler, 1930 from Mamas in Oregon (Lama
glama) with a key to the species of Trichuris present
in North American ruminants. J Parasitol 77:70-77,
1991,

Rickard LG, Bishop JK: Helminth parasites of lamas in
the Pacific Northwest. J Helminthol Soc Wash
$8:110-115, 1991. <

Riemann HP, Behymer D E, Fowler ME, et a
Prevalence of antibodies to Toxoplasiia gondii in
captive exotic mammals. J-A7it Vet Med Assoc
165:798-800, 1974; Ss

 

 

 

 
cat
See

  
   

   

Oxyuris equi
90 x42ym

  

Eimeria leuckarti
76 x 52pm Typical Strongyles

70-130 x 40-65 ym

      
     
  

     
 

Strongyloides westeri
45 x35 pm

      

es

Anoplocephala sp.

Paranoplocephala
50— B8Oum Pee

mamillana
60 x 5Oum

  

EE

Habronema muscae
Dictyocaulus arnfieldi (tate) 45 x lOwm
300-480 x 16um

 

Parascaris equorum
100 x 90m

Fig. 149. Common parasite eggs and oocysts found in horse feces. :

121

 
Section 7

Location of Major Parasites

Parasites of Horses

  
   
      
   
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  

    
    

Nuchat Ligament

Onchocerca cervicatis Ectoparasites

Anterior Mesenteric Artery

 

Strong ylus vulgaris Lice - Haemalopinus
a (Larva) Linognathus
Damatinia

Thelazia
Ticks - Dermacentor

kkodes
Mies - Psoroptes

Chotioptes
Flies -  Stomoxys

Oxyuris equi Culicoides
Simutern

Dictyocautss arnfieldi

Fasciola hepatica | Smatt intestine

 
 
    
   

Strongytus edentatus (Larva) Parascaris equorum

Cecum & Golon Strongyloides westeri

 

Anoplocephata magna

Strongytus vulgaris
Gastrophitus spp. Strongylus edentatus Patanoplocephata mammilana
Draschia megastoma ‘Strongytus equinus
Hatoaamad sep: Small sirongyles

Anoplocephata pertotiata

Trichostrongylus axei

Fig. 150. Locations of the major parasites found in horses.
Note: Micronenut (Elalicephalobus) deletrix larvae are in tissues. Adults are saprophytes.

122
Parasites of Horses

Zoonotic Diseases

Table 34. Major zoonotic diseases associated with horses-uncosmon.

Organism Disease Method of Infection et

 

 

Arthropods
Gastrophilus spp. Myiasis Contact with adult fly
Lice Transient pediculosis Contact with infected horses

 

123
Section 7

Drugs

Table 35. Common names:

 

nd sources of drugs used for deworming horses

 

 

 

 

 

 

Generic and Trade
Class Name Name Source Method
Avermectins
Ivermectin Eqvalan. Merial Paste
Moxidectin Quest Ft. Dodge Oral gel
Benzimidazoles
Fenbendazole Panacur Hoechst Feed, paste, stomach tube
Mebendazole Telnin, Pitman-Moore Feed, paste, stomach tube
Mebendazole + trichlorfon. Telmin-B Pitman- Moore Feed, paste, stomach tube
Oxtendazole Benzehnin. Diamond Feed, stomach tube
Oxibendazole Antheleide- Norden Feed, paste, stomach tube
Oxibendazole Equipar Cooper Feed, paste, stomach tube
Phenylguanidines
Febantel Rintal Haver Feed, paste, stomach tube
Fenbendazole + trichlorfon. Combotel Haver Paste
Imidothiazole
Levamisole + piperazine Ripercol-Piperazine Beecham Stomach tube
Isoquinotenes
Praziquantel + ivermectin Equimax Ft. Dodge Paste
Organophosphates .
Dichlorvos Equigard Squibb Feed
Dichlorves Equigel Squibb Paste
‘Trichlorfon Combot Haver Paste, stomach tube
Piperazines
Piperazine Various Various Stomach tube
Piperazine-carbon disulfide
+ phenothiazine Parvex Plus Upjohn Stomach tube

Piperazine + Phenothiazine
+ trichlorfon

 

imidines
Pyrantel
Pyrantel

Other

Phenothiazine

Carbon disulfide

Py

Dyrex, TE

Strongid-T or P
Imathal-Equine

Various
Various

Ft. Dodge

Pfizer
Beecham

Various
Various

Stomach tube

Feed, paste, stomach tube

  

ed, stomach tube

Feed, stomach tube
Stomach tube

 

124
Table 36, Antiparasitic compounds for major internal parasites of horses

Parasites of Horses

 

Average Removal Expectancy (%)

 

 

 

 

Dose Strongyles Toxicosis
Drug (mg/kg PO) Bots Ascarids vulgaris §. edentatis Small Oxyuris Factor
Avermectin
Ivermectin 0.2 95-100 90-100 95-400 95-100 95-100 72-100 6-10x
Milbemycin
Moxidectin o4 95-100 90-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 5x
Benzimidazoles
Fenbendazole 5-10 0 90-100 95-100 95-100 90-100 95-100 100x
Mebendazole 8.8 0 95-100 95-100 65-95 80-95 95-100 40x
Oxfenclazole 10 0 90-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 10x
Oxibendazole 10 0 90-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 90-100 60x
Phenylguanidines (Pro-BZ)
Febantel 6 0 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 40x
Pyrimidines
Pyrantel 6.6 0 90-100 95-100 67-75 90-100 60-70 20x
Piperazines
Piperazine 88 0 95-100 40-60 0-10 90-100 40-60 3x
Organophosphates
Dichlorvos 10-35 80-100 90-100 0-100 70-80 85-95 90-100 -2-3x
‘Trichtorfon 40 95-100 95-100 0 0 0 95-100 Ix
Imidothiazote
Levamisole + 8488 0 95-100 95-100 60-70 90-100 30-40 3x
piperazine
Phenothiazine
Phenothiazine 44-55 0 0 50-100 20-100 85-100 0 Ix
Combinations
Mebendazole + 8.8 + 40 95-100 95-100 95-100 65-95 80-95 95-100 Ix
trichlorfon
Febantel + 6435 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 95-100 Ix
trichlorfon
Piperazinescarbon 584+52+18 65-75 95-100 90-100 70-90 90-100 50-70 4x
disulfide +
phenothiazine
Piperazine + 88 +28+40 95-100 95-100 95-100 30-50 90-100 90-100 Ix
phenothiazine +
trichlorfon
Carbon disulfide 53 90-100 50-100 0 0 0 0 Ix

 

*Toxicosis factor is the level above the recommended dosage that has been shown to produce toxic effects.

(See Courmey and Sundlof,

1991.)

125
Section 7

   

Strongylus vulgaris

 

ae
Fig, t5ta, Strongylus spp. (6. enslyaris,
equitms). Prepatent period is 200-332 da

 

S. edentates, S.

 

 

Small strongyles
_
a
Fig. 152a, Small strongyles (cyathostomes). Prepatent peri-
oxl is 40 days.

    

Oxyuis equi

 

Fig. 153a, Oxyuris equ. Prepatent period is 5 months.

126

Internal Parasites

Strongylus vulgaris

Common name: Large strongyle (Strongyloidea),

Size of adult: 14-24 mm in large intestine and cecum,

Size of epg: 90 yum x 50 pn.

Importance: Larval migration causes formation of
aneurysms and infarcts of intestinal circulation,

 

tise anemia.

 

which may be fatal, Adults mia
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation, Necropsy shows
aneurysm of cranial mesenteric
Identification of larvae that have hatched in feces

 

 

artery,

 

achieved by asing Baermann apparatus.
Treatment;
Larvae: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO
Moxidectin, 04 mypsky PO
Adults: Fenbendazole, 5 my/kg PO
Ivermeetin, 0.2 my/ky, PO
{Most equine wormers are effective.)

   

     

Species of Cyathostonum, Cylicocyclus,
Cylicocephalus, Gyaloce phalus, ete.

Common name: Small strongyle or cyathostome
{Strongytoidea).

Size of adult: 7. mm in large intestine and cecum,

Size of epy: 90 pm x 50 yum.

Importance
due to local migrations.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. Identification of lar-
vae that have hatched in feces achieved with a

 

 

cause anthriftiness and periodic enteritis

 

Bacrmann apparatus.
Treatment: Benzimidazole/piperazine (see Table 36)
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/ky PO
Moxidectin, 0.4 my/ky PO
Piperazine, 5-7 p/100 Th PO
Pyrantel pamoate, 6.6 mg/kg PO

 

Oxyuris equi

Common name: Pinworm (Oxyuroidea).

Size of adult: 9-150 mm.

Size of egy: 90-100 yum x 40-50 yum in colon and ree-
tum.

Importance: Praritus of anal region, tail rubbing, and
behavioral problems, These worms do not infect
other animals.

Diagnosis: Gather eggs by placing cellophane tape
across anus; microscopic demonstration of epps.
Egys in fecal flotation,

‘Vreatment: Moxidectin, 0.4 mg/kg PO

Piperazine, 5.7 2/100 Ib. PO
Pyrantel, 12.5 my/ky PO
 
   
 
 
  

Parasites of Horses

 

€
Fig. 12c. Typical strongyle egg (arrow) next to Parascaris
eee.

   

ae AY

Fig. 153c, Oxyuris equi (arrow) next to strongyle egg.

  

1 yiivis equi (arrows). Other eggs are
sand Parascaris,

127
Section 7

   
 

Parascaris equorum

Fig. 155a. Parascaris equorumt, Prepatem period is 12
weeks.

 

Habronema spp.

Fig. 186a. Habronema spp. Prepatent period is 2 months.

128

Gastrophilus spp.

Common naw

Si

Importance: Generally nonpathogenic; rarely may cause
perforating gastric ulcers. “Worry factor” due to

ing of female fly as she oviposits.

ellow epys on hair of legs, face. At necrop-

are at pyloric or cardiac region of stom-

: Bot fly (Diptera).
: Approximately 2 cm in stomach.

 

ze of larva

   

 
  
 

buy

 

Diagnos'
sy lary.
ach.

‘Treatment: Carbon disulfide, 5.3 mi/100 ky PO

Dichlorvos, 10 mg/kg PO

Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO

Moxidectin, 0.4 mg/kg PO

‘Vrichlorfon, 40 mg/kg PO

Remove all eggs as soon as they are laid.

Parascaris equorutt

Common name: Ascarid or rommdworm (Ascaridoidea).

Size of adult; 15-20 em in small intestine.

Sie of egg: 100 pm.

Importance: Migrating larvae damage liver and Ings.
Foals may show intermittent diarrhea and consti-

 

  

pation or colic.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
‘Treatment: Fenbendazole, 5 mg/kg PO
Piperazine, 5-7 g/100 Ib PO x 1/2 dose at 3-4 mo;
full dose at 4-5 mo (100-200 mgfky)
Pyrantel pamoate, 6.6 mg/kg PO.
Mebendazole, 8.8 mg/kg PO
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO
Moxidectin, 0.4 mg/kg PO
Prevention: Regular worming schedule and proper

 

management.

Habronema spp.

 

Common name: Stomach worm (Spiruroidea).
Size of adult; 10-15 mm in stomach.
ce of egg: 50-80 jum x 10-20 gti.

Importane

 

 

Migrating larvae cause cutaneous granulo-
matous lesions (“summer sores”) and ulcerative
conjunctivitis. Adults may contribute to gastric
‘mors and may cause gastritis.

 

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation or skin scraping of le-
sion may contain larvae in summer sores.
Treatment: Ivermectin, 0,2 mg/kg PO

Moxidectin, 0.4 mg/kg PO
 
   
 
  

a a
EE asi

SERRE .
a Parasites of Horses

Fig. 156c. Habronema sp.

Sas me

ae
S6b:Habronema sp.

   

129
*

Section 7

  

@
|

Se

~—@-- oc

Fig. 157a. Strongyloides westeri. Prepatent period is 7-10
days.

a

 

ea

Fig. 158a. Avoplocephala spp. Prepatent period is 2
months.

 

Fig. 159a. Bahesia spp. Incubation is 10-30 days.

130

Strongyloides westeri

Common name: Fhreadworm (Rhabditoidea).

Size of adult: S-10 mm in small intestine.

Size of egg: 50 [tm.

Importance: Acute diarrhea in foals 1-3 weeks old;
coughing due to hmg migration. Zoonotic disease
potential.

Diagnosis: Larvated eggs in fecal flotation.

Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO

Oxibendazole, 10 mg/kg PO

 

 

Anoplocephala spp.

Common name: Tapeworm (Anoplocephalidae}.
Size of adult: Up to 80 cm in small intestine.
Size of egg: 80 tum x 50 jum.
Importance: May cause ulceration and inflammation of
ileocecal valve areas generally nonpathogenic.
Diagnosis: Identification of segments on feces or eggs in
fecal flotations.
Treatment: Aibendazole, 25 mg/kg PO
Mehendazole, 15 mg/kg PO
Pyrantel pamoate, 13 mg/kg PO (double dose}
Praziquantel, 1.5 mg/kg and fvermectin, 0.2 mg/kg
PO (Fquimax™)

Babesia spp.

Common name: (Apicomplexa).

Size of trophozoites: 2-4 tun Jong in red blood cells.

Importance: Persistent fever, anemia, icterus, and
splenomegaly.

Diagnosis: Microscopic exam of blood smear.

‘Freatment: Phenamidine, 9 mg/kg IM g 24 hx 2d

Prevention: Tick control.

 
Parasites of Horses

~

 

   
 

Se see

Fig. 158c. Anoplocephata sp.

 

= s

Fig, 159c, Babesia sp. (arrows).

131
 

 

 

Section 7

External Parasites

 
 
   
  

Fig. 159d. Dermacentor albipictus, adult male on left, adult female on right. Common on large animals in winter.

Table 37. Major drugs for control of external parasites in horses

 

Drug (rade Name)

Parasites

Application

 

Organophosphates
Comnaphos (Co-Ral)
Crotoxyphos (Ciodrin)
Diazinon
Dichlorvos (Vapona)
Dioxathion (Korlan-ronnel)
Malathion (Cythion)
Trichlorfon (Neguvon)

Carbamates
ea Carbaryl (Sevin)

Gigandehlorines.
Lindane i
Methoxychlor (Marlate}

Pyrethroids
Fenvalerate (Ectrin)
Permethrin (Atroban, Expar)

Miscellaneous
Carbon disulfide
Ivermectin (Eqvalan)
Moxidectin (Quest)
Pyrethrins

Flies, lice, ticks,

Ticks, mites, lice, flies

Flies, lice, keds, ticks

Flies, stomach bots

Flies, keds, lice, ticks

Flies, lice, keds, mites, ticks
Flies, lice, mites, stomach bots

Lice, mites, ticks

Flies, lice, mites, ticks
Flies, lice, mites, ticks

Lice, mites, ticks
Ticks, flies

Stomach bots

Lice, mites, stomach bots
Lice, mites, stomach bots
Flies

Spray, dust

Dust, spray

Dust, spray

Resin granules, resin strips, spray
Spray

Dust, spray

Oral, injectable, spray

Dust, spray

Dust, spray
Dust, spray

Spray
Spray

Oral
Oral
Oral
Spray

 

Note: Read label directions carefully. The label is the most authoritative source of information.

132
Table 38. Common external parasites on horses

Parasites of Horses

 

Genus and Species

Lice
Bovicola (Damalinia) equi
Haematopinus asini, Microthoracius sp.

Biting louse

Flies
Musca domestica
Musca autunmalis
Sipboua (Haematobia)
Stomoxys calcitrans
Tabauus and Chryops spp-
Mosquitoes
Hypoderma spp.

House fly
Face fly
Horn fly
Stable fly

Mites
Sarcoptes seabiei
Psoroptes equi
Chorioptes bovis
Demodex sp.

Dry mange

Ta

 

Ticks
See listings uncer cattle, ‘Table 31

Common Name

Sucking louse

Horse flyer fly
Several species
Cartle grubs

Scale and wet mange
and hock mange
Nodular mange

Figure Number

Fig.
Fig.

126, Las
125, 127, 146

&

Fig. 121
Fig.
Fig.

 

Fig.

ig. 133, 147
ig. 132, 230b
Hig. 134
Hig. 47

 

 

Bibliography
Internal Parasites

Baker NE, Miller JE, Madigan JE, et al: Anthelmintic
action of ivermectin, oxibendazole and pyrantel
pamoate against thiabendazole-resistant smal}
strongyles of horses. Equine Pract 6:8-19, 1984.

Bello TR: Alternative antiparasitic treatment of horses

with pyrantel pamoate suspension and ivermectin

 

ora! solution compared with horses treated only
with ivermectin solution. J Eq Vet Sei 16:166-170,
1996.

Bello TR, Abell JE: Are equine tapeworms an emerging
discase? A retrospective study. J Eq Vet Sci
19:723-727, 1999,

Bello TR, Laningham ET: A controlled trial evaluation
of three oral dosages of moxidectin against equine
parasites. J Eq Vet Sci 14:483~448, 1994.

. Lyons ET: Survey in central Kentucky for
prevalence of Anoplocepbata perfoliata in horses at
necropsy in 1992. Vee Parasitol 55:8 1-86, 1994.

Blackwell NJ: Colitis in equines associated with
strongyle larvae, Vet Ree 93:40 1-402, 1973,

Brown P, Clayton HM: The pathological changes in the
livers of foals experimentally infected with
Parascaris equorum, } Comp Pathol 89:115-123,
1979.

Clayton TIM, Dunean JL:

  

 

   

Benton Ri

 

 

:xperimental Parascaris

133

equorumt infection of foals. Res Vet Sei 23:109-114,
1977.

Clayton HM, Dunean JL: Clinic
Parascaris equoran infection in worm-free pony
foals and yearlings. Vet Parasitol 4:69-78., 1978,

Clayton L1ML, Dimean JL: The migration and develop-
ment of Parasearis equorum. Int } Parasitol
9:285-292, 1979,

Courmey CH, Asquith R
infecti

  

signs associated with

 

Scasonat changes in pasture

  
   

ry by equine cyuthostomes im north central
Florida, Equine Vet } 17:240-242, 1985.

Courtney CH, Sundtof SE: Veterinary Antiparasitic
Drugs, A Comprebensive Compenium of FDA-
Approved Antiparasitic Drugs, Am Assoc Vet
Parasitologists, Puh $P96, University of Horida, 224
pages, 1991.

Craig TM, Kunde JM: Controlled evaluation of iver-
meetin in Shetland ponies. Ai { Vet Res
42:1422-1424, 1981.

DiPietro JA, Paul A, Todd KS, et al.
of fenbendazole and febantel in ponies with

 

 

 

 

 

 

Controlled trials

 

Parascaris equornn infections. | Equine Vet Sei
4:158-160, 1984.

Drudge JH, Lyons ET, Tolliver SC: Controlted tests of
activity of ivermectin agains1 natural infections of
migratory large strongyles and other intemal para-
sites of equids. Am { Vet Res 45:2267-2271, 1984.

Drudge JH:

 

nical aspects of Stroxgytus eudyaris in-
Section 7

fection in the horse. Emphasis on diagnosis,
chemotherapy, and prophylasis. Vet Clix North Ant
Large Anim Pract 51-265, 1979.

Dunean JL, Pirie HM: The life cycle of Strongylus vul-
garis in the horse. Res Vet Sei 13:374-379, 1972.

Dunean JL, Pirie HM: The pathogenesis of single ex-
perimental infections with Strongylus culgaris in
foals. Res Vet Sci 18:82-93, 1975.

Eysker J, Jansen J, Mirek MEK Inhibited development
of Cyathostominae in the horse in the early third
stage, Res Vet Sci 3 356, 1984.

French DD, Chapman MR: Tapeworms of the equine
gastrointestinal tract. Compend Contin Ed Pract Vet
14:655-661, 1992.

Giles CJ, Urquham KA, Longstaffe JA: Larval cyathos-
tomiasis {immature Trichonema-induced enteropa-
thy}: A report of 15 clinical cases. Equine Vet
17:196-201, 19

Greiner EC, Lane TJ: Effects of the daily feeding of
pyrantel tartrate on Anoplocepbala infections in
three horses; A pilot study. J Eq Vet Sci 1443-44,
1994.

Herd RP, Willardson KL, Gabel AA: Epidemiologic ap-
proach to the control of horse strongyles. Equine
Vet J 17:202-207, 1985.

Herd RP, Donham JG: Efficacy of ivermectin against
cutaneous Draschia and Habraxema infection {sum-
mer sores) in horses. Az J Vet Res 42:1953-1955,
1981.

Herd RP, Donham J cy of ivermectin against
Onebocerca cerviculis microfilaria dermatitis in hors-
es. Ayn J Vet Res 44:1 102-1105, 1983.

Herd RP, Willardson KL: The seasonal distribution of
infective strongyle larvae on horse pastures. Equine
Vet J 17: 37, 1985,

Hutchens DE, Paul AJ, DiPietro JA: Treatment and
control of gastrointestinal parasites. Vet Clin North
fm Eq Pract 15:561-S73, 1999.

Jasko DJ, Roth anulomatous colitis associated
with small strongyle larvae in a horse. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 185 54, 1984.

Jordan ME, Courmey CH: Equine tapeworm. Eq Prac
21:10-14, 1999.

Kivipelto J, Nicklin C, Asquith RI A comparison of
two programs (pyrantel tartrate administered daily
and 3x pyrantel pamoate administered at 8-week in-
tervals) for the reduction of tapeworm EPG in the
horse, | Hq Vet Sci 18:125-128, 1998.

Klei TR, Chapman MR, French DD, et al: Evaluation
of ivermectin at ain elevated dose against equine cy-
athostome larvae, Vet Parasitol 47;99-106, 1993.

Klei TR, Torbert BJ: Efficacy of ivermectin (22,23-dihy-
dro-avermectin By} against parasites in ponies. Ant J
Vet Res 41:1747-1750, 1980.

   
 

 

  

 

   

 

 

   

 

 

   

 

 

 

134

Lichtenfels JR: Helminths of domestic equids.
Mlustrated keys to genera and species with emphasis
on North American forms, Proc Hebninthol Soc

42 (special issue): 1-92, 1975.

Little SE: Adult tapeworms in horses: clinical signifi-
cance, Comp Contin Ed Pract Vet 21:356-360,
1999,

Lyons ET, Drudge JH, Tolliver SC: Antiparasitic activi-
ty of ivermectin in critical rests in equids. An J Vet
Res 41:2069-2072, 1980.

Lyons EY, Drudge JH, Tolliver $C: Ivermectin: Activity
against larval Stronyylus eulgaris and

 

 

“Trichostrongylits axei in experimental infections in
ponies. Azz J Vet Res 43:1449-1450, 1982.

Lyons ET, Drudge JM, Tolliver SC: Controlled tests
with fenbendazole in equids: Special interest on ac-
tivity of multiple doses against natural infections of
migrating stages of strongyles. Ai J Vet Res
44:1058-1063, 1983.

Lyons ET, Dnudge JH, Tolliver SC. et al
pamoate: Evaluating its activity against equine tape-
worms. Vet Med 81:280-285, 1986.

Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Drudge JE: Prevalence of some
internal parasites recovered at necropsy of thorough-
breds born in 1982 in Kentucky, Am J Vet Res
46:679-683, 1985.

Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Drudge JH: Further evaluation
of pyrantel pamoate at the therapeutic dose rate (6.6
mg base/kg) against Anoplocephala perfoliata in
horses. } Hebninthol Soe Wash 64:285-287, 1997.

Lyons E'T, Tolliver $C, Drudge JH, Granstrom DE, et
al Activity of praziquantel against Anoplocepbala
perfoliata (Cestoda) in horses. J Helminthol Soe
Wash 50:1-4, 1992

Lyons ET, Tolliver SC, Ennis LE: Efficacy of praziquan-
tel (0.25 mg/kg-!} on the cecal tapeworm
(Anoplocephala perfoliata) in horses. Vet Parasitol
78:287-289, 1998.

Lyons ET, Tolliver $C, Stamper §, et al: Activity of
praziquantel (0.5 mg/kg:}) against Azoplocepbala
perfoliata (Cestada} in equids. Vet Parasitol
56:255-257, 1995.

Monahan CM, Chapman MR, Taylor HWY, et al:
Comparison of moxidectin oral gel and ivermectin
oral past against a spectrum of internal parasites of
ponies with special attention to encysted cyathos-
tome larvae. Vet Parasitol 63:225-235, 1996.

Pearson GR, Davies IW, White AL, et al: Pathological
lesions associated with Axoploce phahs perfoliata at
the ileo-cecal junction of horses. Vet Ree
132:179-182, 1993.

Proudman CJ, Edwards GB: Are tapeworms associated
with equine colic? A case control study. Eq Vet J
25:224-226, 1993.

 

 

 

Pyrantel

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 
Proudman CJ, French NP, Trees AJ: Tapeworm infec-
tion is a significant risk factor for spasmodic colic
and ileal impaction colic in the horse. Eq Vet }
30:194-199, 1998.

Proudman CJ, Swan JD, Trees AJ: Efficacy of pyrantel
embonate and praziquantel against the equine tape-
worm Anoplocepbala mamitlana. Vet Rec
137:45-46, 1995.

Proudman CJ, Trees AJ: Tapeworms as a cause of intes-
tinal disease in horses. Parasitol Today 15:156-159,
1999.

Rodrignez-Bertos A, Corchero J, Castano M, et all:
Pathological alterations caused by Anoplocepbala
perfoliata infection at the ileocecal junction of
equids. J Ver Med 46:261-269, 1999.

Slocombe JOD, McCraw BM, Pennock PW, et al.:
Effectiveness of ivermectin against later 4th stage
Strongylis eulgaris in ponies. Am } Vet Res
43:1525-

Slocombe JOD, McCraw BM, Pennock PW, et al.:
Effectiveness of fenbendazole against later 4th-stage
Strongylus uulgaris in ponies. Am J Vet Res
44:2285-2289, 1983.

Slocombe JOD, McGraw BM: Evaluation of pyrantel
pamoate, nitramisole and avermectin B, against mi-
grating Strongylus vulgaris larvae. Can } Comp Med
44:93-100, 1980.

Slocombe JOD: Pathogenesis of helminths in equines.
Vet Parasitol 18:139-153, 1985.

‘Vorbert BJ, Kramer BS, Klei TR: Efficacy of injectable
and oral paste formulations of ivermectin against
gastrointestinal parasites in ponies. Am J Vet Res
43:145 11-1453, 1982.

Uhlinger C, Johnstone C
idazole susceptible populations of small strongyles
after prolonged treatment with non-benzimidazole
drugs. Equine Vet Sci, 4:7-9, 1984.

Wescott RB, Jen LW, Hellier LE, et al: Efficacy of com-
binations of piperazine and fenbendazole against
benzimidazole-resistant small strongyles in horses.
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 77:247-249, 1982.

Williamson RMC, Gasser RB, Middleton D, et al.: The
distribution of Axoplocepbata perfoliata in the intes-
tine of the horse and associated pathological
changes. Ver Parasitol 73: 241, 1997,

Yaawinski TA, Hamm D, Williams M, et al-
ness of ivermectin in the treatment of equine
Parascaris equorum and Oxyuris equi infections.
Ant } Vet Res 43:1095, 1982,

  

 

 

 

 

  

ie:

 

ilure to reestablish benzim-

 

 

 

Effective-

 

Protozoan Parasites

Al-Khalidi NW, Dubey JP: Prevalence of Toxoplasma
gondii infection in horses. } Parasitol 65:33 1-334,

135

Parasites of Horses

1979.

ALKhalidi NW, Weisbrode SE, Dubey JP: Pathogenicity
of Toxoplasma gondii oocysts to ponies. An J Vet
Res 41:1549-1551, 1980.

Clark EG, Townsend HIGG, McKenzie NT: Equine pro-
tozoal myeloencephalitis: A report of two cases from
Western Canada. Can Vet } 22:140-144, 1981.

Dorr TE, Higgens RJ, Dangler CA, et al
myeloencephalitis in horses in California. { Ant Vet
Med Assoc 185:801-802, 1984.

Dubey JP; Toxoplasina, Hammondia, Besnoitia,
Sareocystis anct other tissue cyst-forming coccidia of
man and animals. In: Parasitic Protozoa. Volume 3.
New York, Academie Press, Inc. 1977, pp. 101-237.

Dubey JP, Davis GW, Koestner A, et al.: Equine en-
cephalomyelitis due to a protozoa parasite resem-
bling Toxoplasma gondii. | Am Vet Med Assoc
165:249-255, 1974.

Dubey JP, Streitet RH, Stromberg PC, et al.: Sarcocystis
fayeri sp... from the horse. J Parasitol 63:443-447,
1977.

Dunlap JS: Eizeria leuckarti infection in the horse. f
Ai Vet Med Assoe 156:623-625, 1970.

Erber M, Geisel O: Prevalence and development of two.
Sarcocystis spp. in the horse. Z Parasitenkd
65:283-291, 1981.

Engster AK, Joyce JR: Prevalence and diagnostic signifi-
cance of Toxoplasma gondii antibodies in horses.
Ver Med Small Anim Clin 71:1469-1473, 1976.

Fayer R, Dubey JP: Development of Surcoeystis fayeri
in the equine. } Parasitol 68:856-860, 1982.

Fayer R, [Tounsel C, Gites RC: Chronic illness in a sar-
cocystis infected pony. Vet Ree 113:216-217, 1983.

Fenger CK, Granstrom DE, Gajadhar AA, et al:
Experimental induction of equine protozoal
myeloencephalitis in horses using Sarcocystis sp.
sporoeysts from the opossum (Didelpbis virginiana).
Vet Parasitol 68:199-213, 1997.

Frechette JL, Marcoux M: Réneria leuckarti ina colt.
Can Vet f 15: 96, 1974.

Kirkpatrick CE, Skanct DL: Giardiasis in a horse. f Aut
Vet Med Assoc 187:163-164, 1985.

Kistner TP, Ah H-S, Hanson WL: idial oocysts
froma horse in Georgia. } Parasitol 38:709, 1972.

Levine ND: Taxonomy and review of the coccidian
genus Cryptosporidinm (Protozoa, Apicomplexa).
Protozool 31:94-98, 1984.

MarKay RJ: Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis. Ver
Clin N Aut Hy Pract 13:79-96, 1997.

Matuschka FR: Infectivity of sarcocystis from donkey

ysts from dogs. Z Parasitenkd

rotozoal

 

 

 

   

 

 

   

   

  

 

to horse via sporoc

69:299-304, 1983.
McQueary CA, Worley DE, Catlia Ji: Observations on
peria leuckarti in

 

   

the life cycle and prevalence of Fi
Section 7

horses in Montana. Ani J Vet Res 38:1673-1674,
1977,

Simpson CE, Mayhew IG: E
the etiologic agent of equine protozoal myeloen-
cephalitis. J Protozool 27:288-292, 1980.

Vetterling, JM, Thompson DE: Kfossiella equi
Baumann, 1946 (Sporozoa Encoccidia: Adeleina}
from equids. } Parasitol $8:589-594, 1972.

 

vidence for Sarcocystis as

   

 

External Parasites

Besch ED, Griffiths IJ: Demonstration of Demodex
equi (Railliet, 1985) from a horse in Minnesota. }
dln Vet Med Assoe 155:82-83, 1956.

fectiveness of ivermectin for control

 

Drummond RO:
of arthropod pests of livestock. Southwest Entomol
(Suppl. 7):34-42, 1985.

Fadok VA: Parasitic skin diseases of large animals. Vet
Clin North Ant Large Anint Pract 6:3-26, 1984.

Fadok VA, Mullowney PC: Dermatologic diseases of
horses. Part I. Parasitic dermatoses of the horse.
Compend Contin Ed Vet Pract 5:5615-5623, 1983.

Kettle DS: Medical and Veterinary Entomology. New
York, John Wiley & Sons, 1984.

   

 

 

136

Klei TR, Torbert B, Chapman MR, et ale: Prevalence of
Onchocerea cervicalis in equids in the Gulf Coast re-
gion. Am J Vet Res 45:1646-1647, 1984,

Knapp FW: Arthropod pests of horses. In Williams,

RE, et al. (eds): Livestock Entomology, New York,
John Wiley & Sons, 1985.

Kumkle GA, Greiner EC: Dermatitis in horses and man
caused by the straw itch mite, f Amz Vet Med Assoc
181:467-469, 1982.

Loomis EC: Common ectoparasites and their control.
In Robinson, NE (ed): Current Therapy in Equine
Medicine. Philadelphia, W.B. Samders Co., 1983.

Reinemeyer CR, Scholl PJ, Andrews EM, et ali: Efficacy
of moxidectin equine oral gel against endoscopically-

 

 

 

confirmed Gasterophilits nasalis and Gasterophilus
intestinalis (Diptera: Oestridae) infections in horses.
Vet Parasitol 88:287-29 1, 2000.

Scholl PJ, Chapman MR, French DD, et al.: Efficacy of
moxidectin 2% oral gel against second- and third-in-
star Gasterophilus intestinalis De Geer. J Parasitol
84:656-657, 1998.

Scott DW, White KK: Demadicasis associated with sys-
temic glicocorticoid therapy in two horses. Equize
Pract $:31-32, 1983.
     
 

  

Eimeria debliecki

 

  

Ascaris suum 19 x 16m
62 x 45pm
50pm
50ym
Ascarops strongylina
36 x 20m
Oesophagostomum sp. Metastrongylus apri Trichuris suis ; 5
Macracanthe
80 x 40um 50 x 40m 55 x 23,um hirticli

or

Fig. 160. Common parasite epgs and oocysts found in pig feces.

137.

 
Section 8

Location of Major Parasites

Parasites of Pigs

           
   

Ectoparasites

    

   

       
 
     

Stomach Lice - Haematopinus
Hyeostrongylus Mies - Sarcoptes
Trichostrongylus Stephanurus Demodex
Ascarops Flies - Musca
Physocephalus

Muscle

   
   
   
   
    
 
   
 

Esophagus

Taenia solium (Cysticercus}

Gonaytonema Trichinella (Larva)
ee Toxoplasma  (Pseucocyst)
Cecum & Colon
Oesophagostomum
Trichuris
Ascaris
Macracanthorhynchus
Fasciola Globocephalus
Ascaris (Larva) Strongyloides
Stephanurus (Larva)
Fig. 161. Location of the major parasites found in pigs.

138
Parasites of Pigs

Zoonotic Diseases

Table 39. Major zoonotic parasites associated with pigs

 

 

 

Organism Disease Method of Infection
Protozoa
Sareoeystis sutibominis Sarcosporidiosis Ingestion of raw meat
Toxoplasma gondii Toxoplasmosis Ingestion of raw meat
“Trypanosoma cruzi ‘Trypanosomiasis Contact with arthropod vector
Nematodes
Ascaris stn Ascariasis Ingestion of arvated eggs
Strongyloides spp. Cutaneous larva migrans Contaet with larvae
Trichinella spiralis Trichinosis Ingestion of raw meat
Cestodes
Taenia solinm Tacniasis-cysticercosis Ingestion of raw meat
Arthropods
Sarcoptes scabiei Acariasis Contact with infected pigs

  
     

  

£

9 : 3 ,
Ga
Trichinella spiralis a
a @ wl
we

Fig. 163. Trichinelta spiralis.

   

     

Toxoplasma gondii

Fig. 162. Taxoplasmna gondii.

139
Section 8

Drugs
Table 40. Effi

 

of anthelminti

 

in swine

Efficacy against Parasites (%)

 

 

Ocsoph-
Dose Ascaris agostonmun Trichuris Metastron- Hyostrongylus Strongyloides Stephanurus
Drug (mgfkg PO) sunt spp- suis __gylus spp. rubidus ransomi dentatus
Piperazine 275-440 75-100 0 0 0 — 0 0
Pyrantel Preventative: 96-100 99-100 0 0 — 0 0
tartrate 96 piton feed
Therapeutic:
800 p/ton feed
at 1 Ih. feed?
a 40 Ibs. BW,

repeat 75—

100 ths. BW
Hygromycin B12 g/ton feed 95-100 95-100 85-100 0 _ _— 0

to be fed

for 4-6 weeks
Dichlorvos 100 q 24h 92-100 95-100 90-100 0 99-100 60-87 0

x 30 d prior

to farrowing;

or 0.05% of

ration x2 d
Doramectin 0.3 mgfkg 100 99 80 100 99 99 100

aM)
Levamisole 8 99-100 80-100 26-80 90-100 94-100 80-95 83
Fenbendazole = 3-25q 24hx3d 92-100 100 66-100 97-100 99-100 0-98 100
Ivermectin. 0.3 mg/kg 100 63-99 0-91 99-100 86-100 66-100 100

 

(See Courmey and Sundlof, 1991.)

140
Table 41. Major drugs for control of external parasites in pigs

Parasites of Pigs

 

 

      

Drug (rade Name) Parasites Application
Organophosphates
Coumaphos (Co-Ral) Fleas, flies, lice, ticks, Dip, spray, cust
Crotoxyphos (Ciodrin) Ticks, mites, lice, flies Dust, spray
Diazinon Flies, lice, ticks Dip, dust, spray
Dioxathion (Delay) Flies, lice, ticks Dip, spray
Fenchlorphos (Korlan-romel) Flies, lice, mites, ticks Dust, spray
Fenthion (Tignvon) Flies, lice Pour-on
Malathion (Cythion) Fleas, flies, lice, mites, ticks Dip, dlust, spray
Tetrachlorvinphos (Rabon) Flies, lice Dust, spray
Trichlorfon{Neguvon) Flies, lice, mites Injectable, spray
Organochlorines
Lindane , Tice, mites, ticks Dust, spray
Methoxychlor (Marlate) Flies, lice, mites, ticks Dust, spray
Toxaphene Flies, lice, mites, ticks Dip, dust, spray
Miscellaneous
Ivermectin (Ivomec) Lice, mites Injectable (SC, IM)
or in feed
Pyrethins Flies, fleas, lice Spray
Pyrethroids Flies, fleas, lice Spray

 

Note: Read label directions carefully, The label is the most authoritative source of information.

 
=

Section 8

Ascaris suum

Fig. 164a. Ascaris stan. Prepatent period is 8 weeks.

 

 

Trichuris suis

-&

ichuris suis. Prepatent period is 6 weeks.

ae

 

Fig. 165a. 1

 

Fig. 166a. Qesopbagustomuumn dentation, Prepatent period
is 40 days.

 

 

142

Internal Parasites

Ascaris suunt

Common name: Ascarid or roundworm (Ascaridoidea).
Size of egg: 85 sum x 80 tun.
Importance: Pathogenicity varies. In young pigs, stunt-

 

ing, and poor growth, coughing, “milk-spots” in
- In adults,
reduced weight gain, intestinal or bile duct block-

liver; iron-deficient pigs get “thump:

 

age, potential zoonotic disease.

 

Diagnosis: in fecal flotation. Adults found in small
intestine and “milk spots” in liver seen at necrop-
sy.

Treatment: Dichlorvos, 12-22 my/ky PO

Doramectin, 0.3 mg/kg IM
Fenbendazole, 3 mg/kg q 24h x3 d
Hygromycin B, 12 g/ton of feed
Ivermection, 0.3 IM, SC, or in feed
mysky PO (after overnight fast)
Piperazine, 110 mg/kg PO in feed or water

 

Levamisole, 5-!

Trichuris suis

Common name: Whipworm (Trichnroidea)}.

Size of egy: 5S tim x 25 tun.

Importance: Stunting, bloody diarrhea, prolapse, poor
growth,

im fecal flotation. Adults are found in

 

Diagnos

 

large intestine at necropsy.
Treatment: Change quarters.
Dichlorvos, 12-22 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 3 mg/kg q 24 hx 3d
Hygromycin B, 12 g/ton of feed
Ivermectin, 0.3 mg/kg IML, SC, or in feed (variable re-
sults)

Oesophagostomum dentatum

 

common name: Nodular worm (Strongyloidea).
Size of egy: 70 tim x 40 ttm.
Importanes

 
  

lodules in gut wall may: cause ill-thrift or
; condemnation of intestines at slaughter.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. Adults in large imtes-
tine at necropsy.
Treatment: Dichlorvos, 12-22 mg/kg PO
Doramectin, 0.3 mgékg IM.
Fenbendazole, 3 mp/kg q 24hx 3d
Hygromycin B, 12 g/ton feed
Ivermectin, 0.3 mg/kg IM, SC, or in feed
Levamisole, 5-8 my/ky PO (after overnight fast]
Pyrantel tartrate, 800 y/ton feed for | feeding per day
Prevention: Pyrantel tartrate, feed 96 g/ton daily.
   

Fig. 166. Ocesophagostomun dentatum.

143

 
=X

Section 8

 

Strongyloides ransomi

_

Fig. 167a. Strongyloides ransom. Prepatent period is $-7
days.

 

Metastrongylus spp.

Que:
Qo
a

Fig, 168a. Metastrongylis spp. Prepatent period is 1
month.

  
 

 

fsospora suis

Fig. 169a. Isospora suis. Prepatent period is 2 weeks.

@

144

Strongyloides ransomi

 

Common name: Threadworm (Rhabditoidea).
Size of adults: 3-5 mm.
Size of egy: 50 pum x 30 pm.

   

Importance; In piglets, acute mucoid enteritis and bloody
diarrhea, transmammary oral or percutaneous
transmission. Emaciation and anemia results in
stunting; 70-80% mortality results in severe eco-
nomic loss. In adult pigs, mangelike symptoms.

Diagnosis: Fecal flotation. At necropsy mucosal scrap-
ings of smal] intestine contain adult females.

Treatment: Management.

Dichlorvs, | g/sow q 24 h for last 30 days of gestation

Doramectin, 0.3 mg/kg IM

Ivermectin, 0.3 mg/kg, SC, or in feed

Levamisole, 5~8 mg/kg PO (after overnight fast)
Prevention: Proper management.

Metastrongylus spp.

 

Common name.
of adults:
Size of egy: 55 pm x 40 Wm.
Tmportan:

Lamgworm (Metastrongyloidea).
Sem.

    

 

 

Coughing, poor growth. Lungworms en-

 
 

hance other diseases.

Diagnosis: Larvated eggs in fecal flotation. At necropsy
adults are found in hmngs and areas of consolida-
tion at the tips of the diaphragmatic lobes of the
Inngs.

Treatment: Fenbendazole, 3 mg/kg q 24 hx 3d

3 mpfky IM

Ivermectin, 0.3-0.5 mg/kg IM, St

Levamisole, $-8 mg/kg PO (after overnight fast)

Doramectin,

 
   

or in feed

Isospora suis

Common name: Coccidia (Apicomplexa).

Size of oocyst: 16-20 pum x 19-22 jun.

Import in piglets, diarrhea and decreased weight
gain. Adults are resistant carriers.

Diagnosis: Oocysts in fecal flotation. (Test must be re-
peated; may not shed oocyts until 10 days after in-
fection.) Oocysts in intestines seen histologically.

Treatment: Decoquinate, | mg/kg q 24 hx 21 d to sows
before

  

  

ne

 

ind after farrowing.

zine 0.5% in feed, or 130 mg/kg PO then 65
mefke q 12hx4d

Prevention: Proper management.

  

Sulfametha

 
   
 

Fig. 167c. Strongyloides ransomii.

  

Fig. 169c, Isospora sitis.

145

 
Section 8

   

®

NN Eimeria oo @

@O<«___

Fig, 170. Eimeria spp. Prepatent period is 7 days.

 

Fig. 171. Ascarops strongylina. Peepatent period is 6
weeks.

 

 

Fig, 172. Hyostroagyls rubidis. Prepatent period is 3
weeks,

146

Eimeria spp.

Common name: Coccidia (Apicomplexa).
Size of oocyst: 15-25 jum.
Importance: Similar to Isospora spp., but not as patho-

  

genic.
Diagnosis: Oocysts in feces; very similar to Isospora
spp. Ooeysts found in intestine at necropsy.
Treatment: Decoquinate | mg/kg q 24h x 25 d to sows
before and after farrowing (also for prevention).
Sulfamethazine, 0.5% in feed, or 130 mg/kg PO, then
65 mgfkg q 12hx 4d

Prevention: Proper management.

 

Ascarops strongylina

Common name: Stomach worm (Spiruwoidea}.

Size of egg: 20 jum x 40 tun.

Importance: Dung beetle is intermediate host.
Nonpathogenic, tnless present in large numbers;
causes gastritis in adult pigs.

Diagnosis: Fecal sedimentation shows embryonated
ova. Eggs do not float well. Adults found in stom-
ach at necropsy

Treatment: Dichlorvos, 12-22 mg/kg PO

Dorameetin, 0.3 mg/kg IMI
Ivermectin, 0.3 mg/kg IM, SC, or in feed
Prevention: Proper management.

Hyostrongylus riubidis

Common name: Stomach worm (Trichostrongyloidea).
Size of adults: I em.
ize of egg: 65 tun x 35 gun; these do not float well.
Importance: May cause anemia, poor appetite, gastri
and melena due to invasion of gastric glands.
Diagnosis: Fecal flotation shows larvated ova. At
necropsy adults are thin red worms in gastric mu-
cosa.
Treatment: Dichlorves, 12-22 mgékg PO
Doramectin, 0.3 mg/kg IM
Ivermectin, 0.3 mg/kg IM

 

 

 
 

Fig, 173. Macracanthorbyncus birudinaceus, Prepatent
period is 3-4 months.

 

. Gongyionema sp.

Fig, 174. Gongytonema sp. Prepatent period is mknown.

 

months,

147

Parasites of Pigs

Macracanthorbyncbus hirndinaceus

Common name: Spiny-headed worm, thorny-headed
worm (Acanthocephala).
Size of egg: 100 pum x 50 pm.

Importance: Uncommon in USA. May cause peritonitis.
The head is firmly embedded in the mucosa.
Diagnosis: Feeal flotation. Adults are found attached to

the small intestine at necropsy.
‘Freatment: Dichlorvos, 10 mg/kg PO
Prevention: Keep pigs off dirt, away from beetles.

 

Gongylonema sp.

Common name: Gullet or esophageal worms
(Spiruraidea).

Size of egg: $8 jun X 32 Jun.

Importance: Relatively nonpathogenic.

 

Diagnosis: Eggs occasionally in feces. Adults found in

mucosa of esophagus at necropsy.

 

Treatment: None known.

Stepbaiurus dentatus

Common name: Swine kidney worm (Strongylaidea).
Size of egg: 100 jum x 60 jum.

Importance: Loss of weight.

Diagnosis:

 

ggs are in urine. At nceropsy adults are
found in cysts in perirenal fat and pelvis of kid-
ney. Larvae found int fiver,

Treatment: Use uninfected gilts for breeding,
Ivermectin, 0.3-0.5 my/ky IM
Dorameetin, 0.3 mg/kg, IM

   

SC, or in feed
Section 8

 

Fig. 176. Trichinella spiralis, Twenty days for larvae to be
infective. Larvac to adult in 4 days.

 

Taenia solium

Fig. 177, Taenia solitim, Prepatent period is 2 months.

 

Balantidium coli

ee

Fig. 178. Balantidium coli. Lite cycle is 6-14 days.

148

Trichinella spiralis

Common name: Trichina worm (Trichuroidae}.
Size of larva: 100-1,300 gam x 6-40 gam.
Importance: Infects all animals, especially wildlife.
Diagnosis: In humans, death, stiffness, muscle pain.
Detection of larvae in muscle biopsy by squeezing mus-
cle between two glass slides, or digesting muscle in 1%
acid pepsin solution. Eosinophilia is supportive in a di-
agnosis. Serologic tests and skin tests are helpful.
Histology: (See Fig. 233.}
Treatment:
Humans:
Albendazole, 20 mp/kg q 24h x 5-7 days
Mebendazole, 50 mg/kg q 8 hx 10+ d
Corticosteroids in severe clisease
Pigs: None
Prevention: Do not feed uncooked garbage to pigs. Cook all
meat to 77°C (1 70°F} or 66°C for 3 minutes. Freeze
meat to -I5°C (5°F} for 21 days, -23°C (-10°F} for 10
days, or ~30°C (-22°F} for 6 days.
Note: Triebinella in wildlife is not killed by freezing.

 

 

Taenia soli

Common name: Pork tapeworm (Taeniidae). Adults only in
humans.

Size of egg: 35 x 25 jun.

Importance: Cysticerei are in pig skeletal and cardiac muscle,
When eaten by humans, the adult tapeworm develops.
Humans also can develop eysticercasis. No major path-
ogenicity in pigs.

 

Diagnosis: Observation of cysticerci in pigs at necropsy;
serological tests in humans and pigs, eggs in feces of in-
fected humans.

Treatment: In humans: Niclosamide, adults 2 g; children
L.O-L.5 g.

Prevention: Management to prevent pig ingestion of human
feces. Cook pork to 45~SQe0C (1 13-122e0F} for 20
minutes. Freeze pork to ~1000C (1 4eoF} for 4 days.

Balautidium coli

Common name: None (Ciliophora).

Size of trophozoite: 30-150 1m.

Size of cyst: 40 to 60 jum.

Importance: Pig is the usual host, usually considered a com-
mensal, but can cause mild ta severe enteritis. This is a

 

zoonotic infection.

Diagnosis: Clinical signs, and large numbers of organisms in
feeal flotation or smear. Lesions seen at necropsy.
Treatment: In humans: Metronidazole, 750 mg q 8 hx 5d

Pigs: Tetracycline antibiotics (200 mg/gal H,O}
Parasites of Pigs

Haematopinus suis

Life cycle of Haematopints suis.

Haematopinus suis

 

Fig. 179b. Haematopinus suis,
Common name: Hog louse (Insecta-Anophuca).

Size of adult: 5-7 mm. Life cycle is 3-4 weeks.

Importance: Irritation, anemia, may transmit Eperythrozoan suis (a rickettsia).

Diagnosis: Examination of skin for adult eggs, nymphs, and adult lice.

 

Treatment: Amitraz, coumaphos, crotoxyphos, diazinon, dioxathion, fenchlorphos, fenvalerate, ivermectin, lindane,
malathion, methoxychlor, phosmet, permethrin, pyrethrum, pyrethrins, pyrethroids, tetrachlorvinphos, trichlocfon.

   
    
 
 

 

Sarcoptes scabiei

Fig. 180b. Sarcoptes scabiei.

Sarcoptes scabiei.

name: Mange mite (Acachnida-Sarcoptidae).
idult: 350-450 yim. Life cycle is 3 weeks.

iit scraping: :
Serotoxyphos, fenchlorphos, fenvalerate, ivermectin, lindane, methoxychlos, permethcin, phosmet,

 
Section 8

Table 42, List of common external parasites of pigs

 

 

 

Gemus and Species Common Name Figure
Lice

Haematopinus suis Sucking louse Fig. 179
Flies

Musca domestica House fly Fig. 121
Fleas

Pulex isritans Human flea Fig. 44

Tunga penetrans Digger flea Fig. 44
Ticks

Dermacentor spp. Wood ticks Figs. 128-131

Ixodes scajnilaris
Amblyomma spp.

Black-legged tick
Southern ticks

Mites
Sarcoptes scabiei
Demodex phylloides

Mange mite
Follicle mite

Figs. [28-132
Figs 128-131

Fig. 180
Fig. 47

 

Bibliography

Batte EG: A review and update of swine parasite con-
trol, J Aut Vet Med Assoc 170:343-344, 1977,

Bennett DG, and Copeman DB: Gastrointestinal
helminth infections in feeder pigs. Ant J Vet Res
31:1093-1096, 1970,

Cargill CE, and Dobson KJ: Experimental Sarcoptes
scabiei infestation in pigs: (1) Pathogenesis Vet Rec
104:11-14, 1979,

Cargill CF, and Dobson KJ: Experimental Sarcoptes
scabiei infestation in pigs: (2) Effects on production.
Vet Ree 104:33-36, 1979.

Courtmey CH, Sundlof $F: Veterinary Antiparasitic
Drugs, A Comprehensive Compendium of FDA-
Approved Antiparasitic Drugs, American
Association of Veterinary Parasitologists, Publication
SP96, University of Florida, Gainesville, 224 Pages,
1991,

Foreyt WJ, Todd AC, Foreyt KML: Fascioloides magna
(Bassi, 1875) in feral swine from southern Texas. }
Wild! Dis 11:554-559, 1975.

Lindsay DS, Current WL, Ernst JV, et al. Diagnosis of
neonatal porcine coccidiosis caused by Isospora suis.
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 78:89-95, 1983.

Lindsay DS, Emst JV, Current WL, et al.: Prevalence of
oocysts of Isospora suis and Eimeria spp. from sows
on farms with and without a history of neonatal
coccidiosis. J Ant Vet Med Assoc 185:419-421,
1984.

 

 

 

150

Lindsay DS, Current WL, and ‘Taylor JR: Effects of ex-
perimental fsospora suis infection on morbidity,
mortality, and weight gains of nursing pigs. Avi f
Vet Res 46:1511-1512, 1985.

Logan NB, Weatherley AJ, Jones RM: Activity of do-
ramectin against nematode and arthropod parasites
of swine. Vet Parasit 66:87-94, 1997.

Lord, WD, and Bullock WL: Swine ascariasis in hu-
mans. N Engl J Med 306:1 113, 1982.

Marti OG, Stewart TB, and [ale OM: Comparative ef-
ficacy of fenbendazole, dichlorvos, and levamisole
HC] against gastrointestinal nematodes of pigs. }
Parasitol 64:1028-1031, 1978.

Murrell KD, Gamble HR, and Schad GA: Experimental
transmission of Trichinella spiralis to swine by in-
fected rats. Proc Helntinthol Soc Wash 51:66-70,
1984.

Polley LR, and Mostert Ascaris sian in
Saskatchewan pigs: An abattoir survey of prevalence
and intensity of infection. Can Vet f 21:307-309,
1980.

Schad GA, Kelly M, Leiby DA, et al. Trichinella spi-
ralis in Mid-Atlantic slaughterhouses: Relationship
to hog marketing systems. Prev Vet Med 3:39 1-399,
1985.

Schantz PM: Trichinosis in the United States,
1947-1981. Food Technol 37:83-86, 1983,

Schillhorn van Veen TW, and Gibson CD: Anthelmintic
activity of ivermectin in pigs naturally infected with
Ascaris and Tricburis. Am J Vet Res 44:1732-1733,
1983.

 
   

 

 
Sheahan BJ: Experimental Sareoptes scabiei infection in
pigs: Clinical signs and significance of infection. Vet
Ree 94:202-209, 1974,

Sheahan BJ, O’Connor PJ, and Kelly EP: Improved
weight gains in pigs following treatment for sarcop-
tic mange. Vet Ree 95:169-170, 1974.

Steelman CD; Fffeets of external and internal arthro-
pod parasites on domestic livestock production. Ann
Rev Entomol 21:155-178, 1976.

Stewart TB, Fox MC, Miles SE: Doramectin efficacy
against gastrointestinal nematades in pigs. Ver
Parasitol 66:101-108, 1996.

Stewart TB, Marti OG, and | lale OM: Efficacy of fen-
bendazole against five genera of swine parasites. Am
J Vet Res 42:1 150-1162, 1981.

Stewart TB, Marti MS, and Hale OM:
mectin against five genera of swine nematodes and.
the hog louse, Hematopinus suis, Am J Vet Res
42:1425-1426, 1981.

 

 

 

icacy of iver-

151

Parasites of Pigs

 

Stewart TB, Marti OG, and McCormick
of ivermectin against the swine kidney worm,
Stepbanurus dentatus, Am J Vet Res 42:1427-1428,
198 1,

Stewart TB, Marti OG, and McCormick WC: E
of fenbendazole against the swine kidney warm,
Stepbanurus dentatus. Am J Vet Res 42:1627-1629,
1981.

Stewart TB, Bidner TID, Southern LL, et ali: F
fenbendazole against migrating Asearis siinn larvae
in pigs. Am J Ve? Res 45:984—-986, 1984.

Stuart BP, Gosser 115, Allen CB, et al €
swine: Dose and age response to Isospora suis. Can
} Comp Med 46:317-320, 1982.

Whiteman CE, Glock RD; In Bickford AA and Sewartz
K] (eds): Steine Disease Manual. Pioneer
Impressions, Inc. Fort Collins, CO, 1995, 223

  

 

 

 

‘cacy of

   

Liosis in

  

 

  

 

pages.

re
   

 
  

Ascaridia sp.
° eum Syngamus trachea

       
  
 

Eimeria sp.

 

     

Trichomonas
* gallinae | Haemoproteus sp. Plasmodium sp.
Giardia sp.

trophozoite

  

Fig, 181. Common parasite eggs and oocysts found in bird feces:

153
Section 9

Location of Major Parasites

Menacanthus stramineus:

Menopon gallinae

Goniocoles gallinae ; :
Lipeurus caponis Parasites of Birds
Cuclotogaster heterographus

Echidnophaga gallinacea

Dermanyssus gallinae

Ornithonyssus sylviarum Ceca
Argas persicus Helerakis gallinarum

Hislomonas meleagridis
Eimeria spp.

 

  
     
 
   
   
  

Syngamus trached [ Oviduet

Prosthogonimus macrorchis

 

Small Intestine

   
 

Esophagus & Crop

 
   

a Davainea jotting
Capillaria contorta ‘ainea progiottine

  
  
   
   
 

| ; Raillietina spp.
Trichomonas gatlinae ae
Hymenolepis carioca
Ascaridia galli
ani Eimeria spp.
Cheilospirura sp. Hmena, ‘SPP.
Leucocytozean spp.
Dispharynx nasuta
Haemoproteus spp.

Plasmodium spp. Cnemidocoptes mutans

Histomonas meleagridis

Fig. 182. Location of the major parasites found in birds.

Zoonotic Diseases

‘Table 43. Major zoonotic diseases associated with birds

 

Organism Disease Method of Infection
Protozoa

Toxoplasma gondii Toxoplasmosis Ingestion of raw meat
Trematodes

Schistosomatids Cercarial dermatitis Contact with cercariae in water
Arthropods

Biting ji Contact with

     

154
Parasites of Birds

5

ALAA
a7 ®
Trichobitharzia me Po |

xf —— eS

 

\ OD

Fig. 183. Trichobitharcia spp. Adult flukes in ducks, cer-
cariae in water, cause swimmer’s itch in humans.

    

Toxoplasma gondii

Fig, 184. Toxoplasma gondii,

Coccidia in Birds

Table 44. Major pathogenic species of coccidia affecting chickens, turkeys, ducks, and geese

 

 

 

Species Affected Average size (um}__Prepatent Period Region of Intestine
Chickens
Ebneria acervulina 18x 15 4 clays Upper small intestine
Ebneria brimetti 25x19 5 clays Lower small intestine, rectum
Eimeria maxima 30x21 5 days Middle and lower small intestine
Eimeria mivati 16x 13 4 days Upper small intestine
Eimeria necatrix 20x17 6-7 clays Middle to entire small intestine
Eimeria tenella 22x 19 6-7 days Ceea
Turkeys
Eimeria adenoeides 26x17 4 days Ceca
Eimeria dispersa 26x21 5 days Entire small intestine
Eimeria gallopavonis 27x17 4 days Lower small intestine, rectum
Eimeria meleagridis 19x 16 4 days Midclle half of small intestine
Ducks
Eimeria aythyae 20x 16 Unknown Small intestine
Ebneria burcephalae 20x 16 Unknown Small intestine
Eimeria somateriae 32x 14 Unknown Kidney
Ebneria truncata 17x21 5-6 days Kidney
Tyzeeria perniciosa 12x 10 6 days Entire small intestine
Geese
Eimeria anseris 22x17 7 days Posterior small intestine
Eimeria kotlani 31x24 Unknown Ceeum and rectum
Eineria truncata 17x21 5-6 days Kidney
155
Section 9

 

 

 

Drugs

Table 45. Major anticoccidial drugs in chickens and turkeys

Drug Level in Feed {ppm} Drug Level in Feed (ppm)
Amproliuna 125-250 Nitrofarazone 55

Clopidol 125-250 Nitromide 250

Lalofuginone 3 - Sulfadimethoxine 125

Lasalociel 75-125 Sulfaquinoxyline 150-250

Monensin 60-100 Salinomyein 50-75
Nicarbazine 100-200 Zoalene 125

 

 

 

Table 46. Efficacy of anthelmintics for chickens

Efficacy against Parasites (7

 

Drug Dose (mg/kg PO) “Ascaridia  Capillaria __Heterakis_Cestactes
Cambendazole 10mg 95-100 i = =
30 95-100 - — —
50 95-100 95-100 95-100 —
70 95-100 95-100 95-100 =
Coumaphos 40 ppmg24hx 10d 95-100 95-100 95-100 =
Fenbendazole 5 a - 95-100 —
15 = 95-100 95-100 =
Sq24hx3d 95-100 = _ _
Oq2Mhx3d 95-100 95-100 — =
HqMhxed 95-100 95-100 i =
Haloxon 50-100 _ 80-100 a a
Ivermectin 0.1 a 95-100 — -
Levamisole 20 95-100 - Fae _
40 95-100 95-100 _ _
Mebendazole 10q24hx 3d 95-100 = - _
20q2Mhx3 95-100 95-100 - —
. 60 q24hx3d 95-100 95-100 = —
Niclosamide 50 - - = 0-100
Phenothiazine 1,000 - = 80-100 =
Piperazine 250 95-100 — _
5,000 ppm? 95-100 _ _ _
3,000 ppm 80-100 — _ ~
Pyrantel 15 95-100 — — _
100 95-100 — 0-80 _
120 95-100 95-100 0-80 ~

 

Dash indicates not affected or unknown efficacy.
2Administer in drinking water.
bAdminister in feed.

156
Parasites of Birds

Table 47. Efficacy of anthelmintics for pheasants, turkeys, pigeons, and geese
Efficacy against Parasites (%)

 

 

Drug Dose (ng/kg PO) Ascaridia  Capillaria~ Heterakis _Amidostomun __ Cestodes
Pheasants
Febantel 10 95-100 95-100 _
Fenbendazole GO ppm q 24h x6 _ 95-100 95-100 =
Mebendazole @ ppmg BhxGe 95-100 95-100 95-100 _
Niclosamide 50 or 125° — a = 0-100
Turkeys
Levamisole 30 95-100 80-100 95-100 _
300 ppm x 1 dh 95-100 0-100 95-100 -_
Niclosamide 50 or — _ _ aie
125« — = _- 0-100
Piperazine 4,000 ppm q 6 ht 95-100 - _ _
4,000 ppmq24hx2ch 95-100 i = -_
Pigeons
Fenbendazole 7.5 95-100 — _ _
100 ppm q 24hx3d 95-100 95-100 _ _
Haloxon 50 — 95-100 — _
Levamisole 20-40 95-100 95-100 ~ ~
Niclosamide 200 — — — 0-100
Geese
Disophenol 10 SC os
Fenbendazole 5 _
@ ppmq 24hx6ch _
Levamisole 15 —

Mebentazole 10 q24hx 3d
60 ppm q24hx3ch

 

Niclosamide 50 or i 0-100
1259 — 0-100

Pyrantel 50 95-100 =

Trichlorphon 75 95-100 _

 

Dash indicates not effective or unknown efficacy.
sAdminister in food.
“Administer in drinking water.

157
Section 9

 

en galt

a)

Fig. 185a. Ascaridia galli. Prepatent period is 29-50 lays.

  
 

®

\ eet
De

Fig, 186a. Heterakis gallinarum. Prepatent period is 24-36
days.

@
Q

 

ee

Fi, 187a. Capilfaria cwmutata. Prepatent period is 1-2
months.

 

158

Internal Parasites
Ascaridia galli

Common name: Ascarid or roundworm (Ascaridoidea).
Size of adults: 12-18 cm.
Size of egg: 85 jum x 50 pum.
Importance: May decrease egy production, weight gain;
diarrhea, emaciation, anemia in heavy infections.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. Adults found in small
intestine at necropsy.
Treatment: Fenbendlazole, 10-50 mg/kg once, repeat in
10 days
Levamisole, 15 mg/ky PO; for poultry, 40-50 mg/kg
PO
Piperazine, 100-500 mgfkg and repeat in 3 weeks

Heterakis gallinarum

Commen name: Cecal worm (Ascaridoidea).

of adults: 2-4 em in cecum.

Size of egg: 70 im x 40 jum.

Importance: Transmits I listontonas meleagridis, the
protozoan agent of blackhead disease in turkeys.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. Adults found in ce-
cum at necropsy.

Treatment: Fenbendazole, 10-50 mg/kg repeat in 10 d

Levamisote, 40-50 mp/ky PO
Prevention for blackhead <lisease: Nitrofurazoladone,
7 ccf5,000 ce H20

Metronidazole, 25 mg/ky q 12 hx Sd

Benzimidazoles, before and during exposure

(See Hegnigi, et al., 1999.)

 
   

  

Capillaria spp.

Conmon name: Several species (Trichuroidea).
Size of adult; 5-15 mm.
Size of egg: Approximately 50 jum x 25 jim. Several
species have different eggs.
Importance: May cause emaciation, diarrhea, hemor-
thagic enteritis, and death.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation. Adults found in crop
fining and small intestine at necropsy.
Treatment: Fenbendazole, 10-SOmyfky q 24h x 5d
Mebendazole, 25 myfkg q 12hx 5d
Ivermectin, 0.4 mg/kg PO or IM
te
oN

Parasites of Birds

ee
ie

a
i

zoan in a liver section). See arrows. This protozoan para.
site is carried by Heterakis gallinartan.

Foes
al WAN

: Fig. 187. Capillaria sp.
ee Me
of

 
Section 9

 

Fig. 188a. Syigamus trachea. Prepatent period is 2 weeks.

 

Fig. 189a. Tapeworms (several kinds}. Prepatent period is
2-3 weeks.

  

Eimeria tenella
o~

Fig, 190a. Kinieria spp. Prepatent period is 7-10 days.

 
 

160

Syngaimns trachea

Common name: Gapeworm (Strongyloidea).

Size of adult: 2-5 am in trachea.

Size of egg: 90 wm x 50 pum.

Importance: Causes “gaping” (abored breathing), suffo-
cation, and death.

  

Diagnosis: Swabs of tracheal lesions, egg in fecal flota-
tion. Adults found in small intestine at necropsy.
‘Treatment: Fenhendazole, 30 mg/kg x 5 .

Raillietina spp., Choanotaenia spp., ctc.

Common name: Tapeworm (Anoplocephalidae). Many
genera infect birds (Raillietina, Choanotaenia, etc.).

 

Size of adult; Varies depending on genera. Adult in small
intestine,

Size of egg: 70~90 jum,

Importance: Vary from nonpathogenic to enteritis, ill-
thrift, paralysis, and death.

Diagnosis: Proglottids or ova in feces.

Treatment: Niclosamide, 50 mg/kg PO

Praziquantel, 6 mg/kg and repeat in 10-14 d.

Eimeria spp.

 

Common name: Coccidia (Apicomplexa).
Size of oocyst: See Table 44, Qocysts in small intestine.
Importance: Hemorrhagic diarrhea.
Diagnosis: Clinical signs and oocysts in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Anyprolium, 0.012-0.024% in water q 24h
xbSd
Sulfadimethoxine, 0.006%-~0.05% q 24h x6 d

Sulfonamides (enteric), $5 mg/kg PO q 24 has needed
Parasites of Birds

     

Fig. 190b. Eimeria spp.
Trichomonas gallinae

 

Fig. 1914. Trichomonas gallinae. Fig. 194b. Trichomonas gallinae.

Trichomonas gallinae

Contin name: Canker in pigeons, frounce in raptors (Mastigophora).
Sizeof trophozoite: 5-19 ym x 2-9 pin.
Importanée: Weight loss, oral and enteric mucosal lesions.
Diagnosis: Flagelated Gr ganisms in wet smears from mouth or crop. Lesions with cheesy exudate in mouth,
Treatment: Diinetridazéle; 0:0620:08% in water x 7 d or 50 mg/kg PO

Ipronidazole, 500° nig/gal Water X7'd

Carnidazole (Spartrix), 10 mgfadult bird; 5 mg/newly weaned bird

Metronidazole, 60 mg/kg PO

 

Leucocytozoon spp.

Fig. 192a. Lewcocytozoon spp.

 

eS ae

Fig. 192b. Lescocytozoon sp. (arrow).

Leucocytozoon spp.

Common name: None (Apicomplexa),

Size of organism: Gametocyte 14-15 jim x 5-6 im in white blood cells, usually lymphocytes.
Importance: May cause <lecreasect productivity and lethargy. Death in young birds.

Diagnosis: Blood smear. Gametes occur in blood within 7 days. Schizonts can be found in tissues.
Treatment: Clopidol, 0.0125-0.025% in feed for turkeys.

 

162
Parasites of Birds

   
   

Common name: Biting lice (Insecta-Mallophaga). There are many species of biting lice in birds, sucking lice are not present:
Size of adult: 2-4 mm.

Importance: Irritant, may be debilitating.

Diagnosis: Examination of skin and feathers. For adults, nymph and eggs (nits).

Treatment: Carbaryl, roost sprays (5%)

. Coumaphos, roost sprays

Malathion, feather and litter dust (poultry)

Pyrethrin, feather dust

 

i TS

Hea

Cnemidocoptes mutans

    
 
  
  
    
     

Fig. 194a. Cremidocoptes mutans. Fig. 194b. Cnentidocoptes nmitans.

\! Cnemidocoptes (Knemidocoptes) mutans

‘ammon name: Leg and face mites (Arachnida-Sarcoptidae).

ize" of adult: 400 jem.

portance: Proliferative lesions of face, back, vent or legs, especially in ald chickens and psitticines.
is: Skin scrapings of affected areas for adults, nymphs, and eggs (nits).

enzyl benzoate, 10% topical solution once a week x 4 weeks.

Tatamiton, apply topically once a week x 4 weeks.

iéctin, 0.2 mg/kg PO or IM

163

 
 

Dermanyssus gallinae

eee
es

Fig. 19Sa. Davinairy ssu3 galliniae:

 

Fig. 19Sb. Dermanysstes gallinae.

 
   
   

   

‘Feather-inites (Arachnida-Dermanyssidae).
Size of adult: 1.0 min. .
importance: Pruritus, decreased production, debiitation, anemia.
Diagiidsis: Observation of mites (adults, nymphs, larvae, eggs) m feathers. Night observation is best. Life cycle is 9-12 days.
Treatment: Treat host and environment.
Coumaphos, (0.5%) dust topically x 3d
Malathion, (4%) dust topically x 3 d

 

      
  
     
 

z — 19st

   

Fig. 196a. Argas persicus. Fig, 196b. Argas persicus.

‘Argas persicus

Contmon name: Ticks (Arachnida-Argasidae).
Size ofadult: 7 x 5 mm.

tmpottarcé: Decreased production, anxiety, anemia, vector for fowl spirochaetosis.

Diagnosis: Soft ticks on birds at night or in environment. Birds afraid to go in chicken house. Life cycle is 1 month.

Trea Ment: Treat host and environment. Premises at 1-2 gal/1,000 ft? with carbary! 2% spray, or malathion 1-3% spray,
sprays containing pyrethroids or coumaphos,

 

164

 
Parasites of Birds

Fig. 197. Protalges (Fainalges) sp. (feather mite, 360 jum x
225 tm) from a parakeet.

199. Dispharynx sp. larvated eggs (40 jm Xx 20 yim ).
Adult nematodes in gizzard or proventriculus.

    
 

Fig. 200a. Giardia sp. cysts in sugar fecal flotation (15
Him). Giardia sp. is found in many birds.

 

  

AS a
0b: Haemoproters sp. in erythrocytes (Protozoa-
Ie a) (arrows).

   

ve,
i as f S
Fig. 200c. Sarcocystis sp. (pseudocyst) in muscle
(Protozoa-Apicomplexa).

 

165
Section 9

Bibliography

Textbooks

Davis JW, Anderson RC (eds): Parasitic Diseases of Wild
Animats. Ames, lowa, lowa State University Press,
1971.

Davis JW, Anderson RC, Karstad LEI, Trainer DO (eds):
Infectious and Parasitic Diseases of Wild Birds, Ames,
lowa, lowa State University Press, 1971.

Dunn, AM: Veterinary Helninthology. London, William
Heinemann Medical Books Lrd., 1978.

Flynn R$: Parasites of Laboratory Animals. Ames, lowa,
lowa State University Press, 1973.

Fowler ME (ed): Zoo & Wild Aninial Medicine, 2nd edi-
tion. Philadelphia, WB. Sanders Co, 1986.

Gaafer $M, Howard WE, Marsh RE (eds): Parasites,
Pests, and Predators, New York, Esevier, 1985.

Gordon RE, Jordan FIW (eds): Poultry Diseases, London,
Bailliere Tindall, 1982.

Kranz GW: A Manual of Acarotogy. 2nd edition.

Corvallis, Oregon State University Book Stores, 1962.

Veterinary Helminthology and

Sth edition. Baltimore, William &
Wilkins, 1962.

Levine NI): Protozoan Parasites of Domestic Animals and

 

  

 

 

  

of Man. 2nd edition. Minneapolis, Burgess Publishing
Co., 1973.

Olsen OW: Animal Parasites: Their Biology and Life
Cycles, Ind edition. Minneapolis, Burgess Publishing
Co., 1967.

Petrack ML (ed): Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds,
Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1982.

Richie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR: Avian Medicine:
Principles and Application. Lake Worth, Florida,
Wingers Publishing Inc, 1994.

Soulsby EJL: ehninths, Arthropods and Protozoa of
Domesticated Animals (Monnig). Philadelphia, Lea &
Febiger, 1968.

Wallach JD, Boever W’]: Diseases of Exotic Aninals,
Philadelphia, WB, Saunders Co, 1983.

Woheser GA: Diseases of Wild Waterfowl. New York,
Plenum Press, 198 1.

   

 

 

Miscellaneous

Bennett GE, and Fallis AM: Blood parasites of birds in
Algonquin Park, Canada, and a discussion of their
transmission, Canad. J, Zoot, 38:321-273, 1960,

Bennett GE, Garnham PCC, and Fallis AM: On the status
of the genera Lewcocytozoon Ziemann, 1898 and
Haemoprotens Kruse, 1890 (Hacmosporidiida:
Loucocytozoidae and Hacmoprotcidae). Canad J Zool
43:927-932, 1965.

Current WL, Upton SJ, and Haynes TB: The life cycle of

iditan baileyi n. sp. (Apicomplexa,
Cryptosporidiidac) infecting chickens. J Protozool
33:289-296, 1986.
Fain A, and Hyland

 

 

The mites parasitic in the hgs of
birds. The variability of Steraustoma tracheacolium
Lawrence, 1948, in domestic and wild birds.
Parasitology 52:401-424, 1962.

Flegngi EN, Doerr }, Cummings TS, et al: The effective-
ness of benzimidazole clerivatives for the treatment and
prevention of histomonosis (blackhead) in turkeys. Vet
Parasitol 81:29-37, 1999,

Keymer IF: The diagnosis and treatment of common
psittacine diseases. Mod Vet Pract 39:22-30, 1958.
Leibovitz 1: Unusual bird-parasite cases and overall para-
site incidence found in a diagnostic laboratory during a

five-year period. Avian Dis 6 141-144, 1962.

Manson-Bahr P: ‘The life history of avian filaria parasites.
Bill Br Orn Chub 74:75-77, 1954.

MeDonald ME: Auotated Bibliography of Helminths of
Waterfowl (Anatidae). US. Department of the Interior.
Special Scientific Report—Wildlife No. 125, 1969.

McDonald ME: Catalogue of Helminths of Waterfowl.
US. Department of the Interior. Special Scientific
Report No. 126, 1969b.

McDonald ME: Key to ‘frematodes Reported in
Waterfowl. U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and
Wildlife Service, Resource Publication No. 142,
Washington, DC, 1981.

Peirce MA, and Bevan BJ: Blood parasites of imported
psittacine birds. Ver Ree 100:282~284, 1977.

Radford CD: The mites (Acarina: Analgesidae) living on
or in the feathers of birds. Parasitology 42:199-230,
1953,

Scholtens RG, New JC, Johnson S: The nature and treat=
ment of giardiasis in parakeets. | Am Vet Med Assi
180:170~173, 1982.

  

 

 

166
Section 10

PARASITES OF RATITES
(Ostriches, Emus, and Cassowaries)

Location of Major Parasites

  
 
    
    
   
     
    

Baylisascatis larvae Philophthalmus
Chandierella larvae

Struthiolipeurus

Pterolichidae

Ctenacephalides

Simulium

several ticks

Toxoplasma pseudocysts

Lungs

Paronchocerca
Trachea

  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Intestine

Cryptosporidium
Giardia
Eimeria
Codiostomum
Ascaridia q
Deletrocephalus
Houttuynia
Davainea
Leucocytozoon

Plasmodium

  
   

Histomonas

Proverticulis’
Gizzard
Connective tissue Libyostrongytus

Dicheilonema Cytnea
Habronema

 

Fig. 201, Locations of parasites in ratites (ostrich, emu, rhea and cassowary}.

Drugs

Table 48. Anthelmintics for ratites

 

Internal parasites

Fenbendazole, 15 mg/kg PO or in feed (nematodes and cestodes}
Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg $C or PO (nematodes)

External parasites
Carharyl (5%) dust is used for most external parasites (ticks, mites, lice, fleas}
Svermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or PO (ticks, mites, lice)

 

 

167
Section 10

Common Parasites

Table 49. Parasites of ratites

Parasite

Prowzoa
Cryptosporidium:
Toxoplasma gondii
Histomonas meleagridis
Giardia

 

Yrichomonas
Leucocytozoon strithionis
Plasmodium strutbionis

 

Mimeria spp.
Isospora spp.

Trematodes
Philophthatmus gralti

Cestoces
Houttuynia struthionis
Davainea spp.

Nematoces
Libyostrongylus spp. (wireworms)
Codiostomum strutbionis
Syngamius trachea
Dicheitonema spp. {filarial worm in connective tissue)
Chandlerella quiscali (larval stage in CNS)
Baylisascaris sp. (larval stage in CNS)
Paronchocerca struthiononus
Struthiofilaria megalocepbala
Cyrnea colini
Ascaridia orthocerca
Deletrocephatus spp.
Habronema (Spiroptera) incerta
Dromaestrongylus bicuspis (small intestine}

External parasites
Lice
Struthiolipeurus spp. {biting lice)
Mites
Pterolichidae spp. (quill mites}
Gabucinia spp.
Paralges pachynemis
Ticks
‘Ticks froma variety of mammalian, avian,
and reptile hosts have been reported to infest ratites.
These include:
Amblyomma spp.
Argas persicus
Haemophysalis spp.
Otobius megnini
Rhipicepbalus spp.
Fleas
Clenocephalides felis
Flies
Sanulinm spp.

168

Ratite

Ostrich, anc likely to be found in all ratites
All ratites

Ostrich, rhea

Ostrich, enw

Ostrich, emu

 

Ostrich
Ostrich
Ema, and likely to be found in all ratites
Ostrich

Ostrich

Ostrich
Ema, cassowary, rhea

Ostrich
Ostrich

Ostrich, emu, rhea
Ostrich, rhea

Ema

Ostrich, emu
Ostrich

Ostrich

Ostrich

Rhea

Rhea

Rhea

Emu

 

Ostrich, rhea
Ostrich

Ostrich, rhea
Ostrich, rhea

Ostrich

Ostrich
Parasites of Ratites (Ostriches, Emus, and Cassowaries)

  

Sein ee
Fig. 205. Pseudocyst of Toxoplasna uo
of a thea (psuedocyst is 25 yum).

 
    

Fig. 204, Ascaridia sp. egg from a thea (85 rm x 50 wm ).

169

 
=

Section 10

Bibliography

Bartlett CM, Anderson RC: Paranchocerca struthionis
from ostriches (Struthio camelus} with a redescription
of Paronchocerea ciconiarnm (Peters, 1936) and a re-
view of the genus. Can J of Zoo 64:2480-2491, 1986.

Borst GHIA, Lambers GM: typhlohepatitis in ostriches
(Struthio camelus) caused by Histomonas infection. Tif
voor Dierg 110:536, 1985.

Bowthorpe G, Voss G: Breeding the rhea (Rhea americana}
and emu (Dromiceius novaebollandiac) at Winnipeg,
Zoo. Int Zoo Year :147-150, 1968.

Farr MM& Further observations on survival of the proto-

 

   

zoan parasite Histomonas maleagridis, and eggs of
poultry nematodes in feces on infected birds. Cornell
Vet $1:3-13, 1961.

Fockema A, c¢alz Anthelmintic efficacy of fenbendazole
against Libyastrongylus douglass? and Houtteynia
struthionis in ostriches. } of S African Vet Assoc
56:47-48, 1985.

Gajadhar AA: Cryptosporidiam species in imported os-

  

riches and consideration of possible implications for

170

birds m Canada. Can Vet J 334:115-116, 1993.

Greve JH, Harrison GJ: Conjumetivitis cansed by eye
Hukes in captive-reared ostriches. JAVMA
177:909-9 10, 1980.

otic ticks on imported ostriches, Foreign Anim

5-7,1989.

the anthelmintic efficacy of resorantel
against Howttuynia struthionis in ostriches. Jofs
African Vet Assoc $9:207-208, 1988.

Hoover JP, et al.: Quill mites in an ostrich with rhinitis, si-

26,

 

 

Grow AzI
Dis Rep, 1
Gruss B, et

 

 

nusitis, and air sacculitis. Com: Asin Pract 2:
1988,

Jensen JM, Johnson JH, Weiner St: Husbandry and med-
ical management of ostriches, emus and rbeas. College
Station, Texas, Wildlife and Exotic Animal
Teleconsultants, 1992.

Malan FS,et al: Resistance of Libyostrongylus douglass
in ostriches to levamizole. J of § African Vet Assoc
59:202-203, 1988.

Mertins JW, Schlater JL: Exotic ectoparasites of ostriches
recently imported into the United States. f of Wild! Dis
27:180-182, 1991.

Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR: Avian Medicine.
Lake Worth, Florida, Wingers Publishing, Inc., 1994,

Soulsby EJL, Monnig HO: Helminths, arthropods and
protozoa of domesticated aninals. 7th edition. London,
Bailliere ‘Tindall, 1982.

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 
Section 11

PARASITES OF LABORATORY ANIMALS

 

 

Drugs

Table 50. Coceidiostats used in rabbits

Drug Dosage

Monensin 0.002-0.004% in feed
Sulfaquinoxaline 0.04% in water; 125-250 ppm in feed
Sulfamethazine 8 gfgal waters 0.5-1.0% in feed
Sulfadimethoxine 75-100 mgfkg

Decoquinate 62.5 ppm in feed

Lasalocid 120 ppm in feed

 

Table 51. Dewormers for use in hedgehogs

 

 

Parasite Dmg Dose/Route

Nematodes Tvermeetin 0.2 mg/ky PO; SQ once; repeat q 2 weeks
Fenbendazole 10-25 mg/kg PO once; repeat q 2 weeks
Mebendazole 15 mg/kg PO once; repeat q 2 weeks

Cestodes Praziquantel 7 mghkg PO; SQ once; repeat q 2 weeks

Flagellates Metronidazole 25 mg/kg PO BID

Fleas Pyrethrins/carbamates _‘Topically

Mites Amitraz 0.3% topically weekly for 2-3 weeks
Ivermectin 0.2 mgfkg PO: SQ

RAD

 

Common Parasites

Table $2. Eimeria species (protozoa) infecting rabbits

Species Mean Size of Oocyst (jtm) Prepatent Period (days} Pathogenicity
E. stiedae 37x 20 13-18 Variable
5, irresidua 38 x 26 78 Diarrhea

  

magna 35 x24 67 Diarrhea
E. media 31x18 6-7 Moderate
E, perforans 2Ix15 Ss Nonpathogenic
E, exigua 15x13 Unknown Unknown
E, intestinalis 27x18 10 Diarrhea

E, matsubayashii 25x18 7 Slight
neoleporis 39x 20 12 Diarrhea
E. cnecicola 29x 18 9-10 Unknown
Havesceus 32x21 9 Diarrhea

 

 

171
Seo

Section 11

Table $3. Common parasites in laboratory animals

 

Parasite Genus and Species
Rabbits
Nematodes
Passalurus ambiguous (pinworm)
Obeliscoides cuniculi

‘Tapeworms
Cinotaenia variabilis, C. ctenoides
Mosgovuyia spp.
Monoecocestus americana

Trematades
Hasstilesia tricolor
Fasciola hepatica

Mites
Cheyletiella spp.
Psoroptes cuniculi
Listropborus spp.

Hamsters

Protozoa
Spironucleus (Hexamiita) muris
Giardia sp.
Tritrichomonas spp.
Balantidisn sp.
Cryptosporidium

Nematodes
Sypbacia sp. (pinworms}

Cestodes
Hymenolepis nana (direct life cycle}
H. diminuta (indirect life cycle using
insects as intermediate hosts}.
Larval tapeworms

Mires
Demodex spp.
Notoedres sp.
Ornitbonyssus bacoti
Liponyssus bacoti

Gerbils

Protozoa
Giardia sp.

Nematades

Dentostometla translucida (pinworms}
Sypbacia spp. (pinworms}

172

Comments

Pinworm (Vig. 209)

Found in the stomach

Larval tapeworms (cysticerci} may be in the liver,
free in the peritoneal cavity, and attached to the
omentum

Nonpathogenic
Rare

Fur mite, walking danders common (Vig. 211)
Cases mange in the ears; common (Fig. 210)

 

A flagellated protozoan that may cause enteritis

Acommon flagellated protozoan. Cysts and
trophozoites found in the small intestine and feces

Hagellated protozoan, usually nonpathogenic;
15 x 10 pm Encepbalitozoon, Pneumocystis,
Entomoeba, Chilomastix, ete; mcommen

A ciliated protozoan, usually nonpathogenic:
imcommen

May cause diarrhea. Qocysts detected in feces

Eggs approximately 115 x 40 jon Other nematodes
are rare in hamsters in North America

Eggs of H. sama are 50 x 40 pm

Eggs of H. diminuta are 50 x 65 jon
Cysticerci of Taenia taeniaeformis may be in the liver

May canse alopecia and dry, scaly skin; very common
May cause skin lesions

Blood-sucking mites from birds and rodents
Blood-sucking mites from birds and rodents

. 207}

 

May cause diarrhea. Cysts and trophozoites can be
detceted in feces

If in conraet with mice or rats (Fig. 221}
Parasites of Laboratory Animals

Table $3. Commom parasites in laboratory animals (continued)

 

 

 

 

  

Parasite Genus and Species Comments
Mites
Demudex spp. May cause skin lesions
Liponyssoides sp. Blood-sucking mites from birds and rodents
Cestodes
Hymenolepis spp. May cause debilitation
Mice
Protozoa
Trypanosoma muscuti Hlagellates in the blood
Toxoplasma gondit Cysts in the tissues
Sarcucystis nauris Sarcocysts in the muscles
Klossiella mutris Coccidia in the kidneys
Encephatitozaan cunietdi Mlicrosporidia in the brain
Puetmocystis ctvinit Trophazoites and cysts in lungs and other tissues
Giardia nutris Trophozoites and cysts in small intestine and feces
Spironucleus (Hexamita) nutris Flagellated protozoa in smafl intestine and feces
Tritrichomonas muris Nonpathogenic flagellate in the gastrointestinal tract
Eaneria fateiformis Pathogenic coccidian. Qoeysts are detected in the feces
Cryptosporidian muris: C. parvum May cause diarrhea, especially in young animals.

Oocysts are 7x Sum (C, muiris) and
Sx 3 wm (C. parvinn)
Nonpathogenic organism

 

 

Extomoeba muri

 

   

  

Nematodes
Syphacia obvetata (pinworm) Adults are 1.1-3.4 mm inthe large intestine
High number of worms may be pathogenic
Epes are 134% 36 lum
Aspicularis tetraptera (pinworm) Adults are 2.04.7 mm in the large intestine
High mumber of worms may be pathogenic
us are 90h 41 Jum
Cestades
Hymenolepis diminuta Adults 20-60 mm long x 4 mm wide. This tapeworm
has ato hooks on the scoles; requires am
intermediate insect host
Hymenolepis nana Aduits 25-40 mm long x 1 mm wide. Ir has hooks:
on the scoles (armed rostelhim); does not require
am intermediate host
Hy enolepis microstoma Found in the bile «duct
‘Taenia taeniaeformis Intermediate eysticerens stage in the liver of mice
Fleas
Xenopsytla cheopis (oriereal rat flea) Transmits plague
Nosopsyllus fasciatus (northern rat tea)
Leptosytla segnis (mouse flea)
Lice
Polyplaw serrata (mouse louse) Sucking louse (Fig. 21-4)
Hoplopleuira spp. Sucking louse
Mites

 

Ornitbonyssus bacoti (tropical rat mite) Any of these mites cam be found on mi
Ornithonyssus syleiarum (northern fowl cause skin conditions and irritation (1
mite)

 

173

QOD
Sao

Section 11

 

Table 53.

Parasite

Rats
Protozoa

Nematodes

Cestades

Lice

mmom parasites in laboratory animals (cortined)

Genus and Species

Liponyssoides sanguineous (house
mouse mite}

Haemogamasus pontiger

Eulaclaps stabularis

Laelaps echidiuis (spiny rat mite)

Haemolaclaps spp.

Myobia nuseuli (fur mite)

Radfordia affinis (fur mite)

Psorergates simplex (hair follicle mite}

(Fig. 216)

Notoedres musculi

 

Demodex musculi
My

  

ocoptes musculinus (Fig. 215}

‘Trypanosoma lewis

Toxoplasma gondii

Sarcocystis muris

Encepbalitozoan (Nosema) camiculi
Pnenmocystis carinit

Giardia muris
Spironucteus (Hexamita) muris

Eimeria nieschultai
Extomoelut muris

Sypbacia muris (pinworm}

Aspicularis tetraptera (piwworm)

Heterakis spumosa

Hymenolepis nana

Hymenolepis dintinuta

Polyplax spinulosa

174

Comments

In blood {nonpathogenic}
‘sts in various tissues

 

Cysts in muscles

Microsporidian, often nonpathogenic

Trophozoites, cysts, precysts, and intracystic
bodies in lings

Cysts and trophozoites in feces. Low pathogenicity

Flagellated protozoan (8 x 3 jum) causes duodenitis.
There are many nonpathogenic flagellates in rats

Qocysts are 22 x 17 Um. It causes diarrhea, weakness,
emaciation, and death in young rats

 

Found in the cecum and colon (nonpathogenic)

In the cecum and colon. Causes reduced growth.
Males are 1-1.5 mum long; females are 3-6 mm
long. Eggs are 140 x 45 pon.

Bigger worms than Syphacia musris. Males are
2-4 mm; females are 3-4 mm. Eggs are 80 x 40 pm

Found in the cecum and colon of wild rats. Has a
typical ascarid-like egg (60 x 50 pam), Nonpathogenic

 

Found in the small intestine. Called the dwarf
tapeworm because it is usually 20-40 mm long, by
1 mm wide. Flooks are present on the rostellum.
Life cycle is direct or indirect (using insects as
intermediate hasts}

Found in the small intestine. Called the rat tapeworm.
It is much larger than H. nana (20-60 nm long x
4 mm wide}. There are no hooks on the rostellum

‘an infect humans

 

The spined rat louse is common in laboratory and
wild rats. Sucks blood and causes irritation, anemia,
and debilitation
Table $3. Commom parasites in laboratory animals (continued)

Parasite
Mites

Guinea Pigs
Protozoa

Nematodes

Fleas

Mites

Hedyehogs

Nematodes

Gems and Species
Radfordia ensifera {also Myobia ratti)

Notoedres muris

Laelaps echidninus

Cryptosporidium iwrairi
Giardia caviae

Eimeria caviae

Toxoplasma gondii
Sarcocystis caviae

Praspidodera uncinata

Gliricola lindolpbi, G. procelli
Gyropus ovalis
Trimenopon bispidium

Nosoph yllus fasciatus
Pulex irritans
Ctenocepbalides felis
Rhopalopsylta clavicola

Demodex caviae
Chirodiscoides caviae (Fig. 225}
Myocoptes musculinus
Notoedres muris

Trixacarus caviae (Fig. 219)

 

Capillaria aerophila

175

Parasites of Laboratory Animals

Comments

Fur mite of rats. Commonly oceurs on wild rats.

May cause irritation and ill health

Ear mange mite resembles Sarcoptes scabiei, and are
burrowing mites that cause mange. Scabby lesions
are primarily on the head, face, nose, ears, and tail

The spiny
Lives in

 

red mites, appro:

rat mite uncommon on laboratory rats.
bedding and feeds on rats at night. Long,

  

imately I mm long, with long

legs. Usually nonpathogenic, but can transmit
Heptozoon muris

May canse diarrhea and death

Flagellated protazoans. Trophozaites 12 x 5 pun.

Trophozoites and cysts can be found in feces.
Nonpathologic

Ooeysts are 19 x 16 jm. These cuccidia may cause

diarrhea and weight loss. Sulfas may be helpful in

controlling this infection

c

 

ysts in various tissues

Cysts in varions muscles

Numerous nonpathogenic flagellated protozoa found
in the gastrointestinal tract

Found oceasionally in the cecum. Unlikely to cause

disease,

 

D, fitari

 

Guinea pigs also experimental hosts for

icbinella spiralis, Dietyocaulus viviparus,

 

1, Metastrongylus apr

 

Parelapbostrongylus tennis, and ascarids

Fairly common, but not very pathogenic (Fig,

218)

 

Uncommon unless there is a flea problem in the

household

Found in the Inn

 

e
  

   

_ Parasite

Fleas

Mites

Ticks

‘ommom parasites in laboratory animals (continued)

Genus and Species
Crenosoma sp.
Capillaria hepatica

Archaeopsylla erinacei

Caparini sp.
Chorioptes sp.
Otodectes cynotis
Ornithonyssis sp.

Ixodes hexagonus
Amblyomma nuttalli

  
 

Comments
Found in the lungs
Found in the liver (necrotic aréa:

   

 

   

May cause severe skin irritation, may bite humans:
the household

 

Fig. 206 Otodectes cynotis causes body mange in hedge-

hogs.

 

176

 

Fig. 207 Ornithonyssues sp. (mite) on a hedgehog.
These mites suck blood and cause irritation.

   
     

Fig. 209 Passalurns ambiguous (}
worn) in rabbits, Adult: wit h:bulbous:
esophagus (arrow). Inset is epg

100 jun x 43 pti. :
sites of Laboratory Animals

Fig. 211 Cheytetiella spp. (fur mite} in rabbits,
prominent palpal hooks (arrow).

Fig. 22 Listrophorus sp., a fur mite of rabbits (lateral
view).

 
 

ction 11

Fig. 216 Psorergates simplex hair, follicle mite itt section of
skin of mouse (arrows).

 

Fig. 218 Gliricofa, the common biting louse of
guinea pigs.

 

Fig. 220 Cryptosporidiun: sp. (hamster).

 

178

    

  
 

2. re
age :
Bio R ene BEM OUD

 
 

&

Fig. 217 Trypanosoma sp. in blood of mice and rats.

 

Fig. 221 Pinworm eggs (Dentostomella spp.) in a gerbil.

 
   

Fig. 224 Chirodiscoides caviae (a mite),

found on guinea pigs.

Bibliography

Brockie RE: The hedgehog mange mite, Caparinia tripilis in
New Zealand. N Z Vet J 22:243-247, 1974.

Duwel D, Brech K: Control of oxyuriasis in rabbits by fen-
hendazole. Lab Anint 15:101-105, 1981.

Fitzgerald PR: Efficacy of monensin or amprotium in the
prevention of hepatic coccidiosis in rabbits. J Protozool
19:332-334, 1972.

Flecknell P (ed): Manual of Rabbit Medicine and Surgery.
Ames, lowa, Iowa State University Press,160 pp., 2000.

Flynn RJ: Parasites of Laboratory Animals. Ames, lowa,
Iowa State University Press, 1973.

Graczyk TK, Cranfield MR, Dunning C, et ali: Fatal cryp-
tosporidiosis in a juvenile captive African hedgehog,
{Atelerix albiventris). J Parasitol $4:178-180, 1998.

Harkness JE, Wagner JE: The Biology and Medicine of

Rabbits and Rodents. 4th edition. Baltimore, Williams &

Wilkins, 1995,

 

 

179

arasitesof Laboratory Animals

Fig. 223 Ofodectes cynotis in the ears
of a ferret.

Fig. 225 Chirodiscoides caviae (enlarged view):

 

Hsu CK: Parasitic Diseases. In HL Foster et al. (ed
Mouse in Biomedical Research. H. Diseases: i
Academie Press, 1982, pp. 359-372,

 

1980.

Letcher JD: Amitraz as a treatment for acaniasis: in A
hedgehogs (Atelerix albiveatris). [Zoo An
19:24-29, 1.988.

Lloyd M (ed.): Ferrets: Health, Husbandry: ad Diseases.
Ames, lowa, lowa State University Préss;''1999; 208’ pp.

Malley D: Use of a frontline spray in fabbits. Ver’ Ree
140:664, 1997.

Oge H, Avaz E, Ide T, Dalgic $: The effect’ of déramectin,
moxidectin and netobimin against natural infections
Syphacia nuris in rats. Vet Parasitol 88:299-303, 2000.

Okerman L: Diseases of Domestic Rabbits. 2nd edition.
Ames, Iowa, Iowa State University Press, 1994, 160 pp.

 
SOB

Section 11

Percy DH, Barthotd SW: Pathology of Laboratory Rodents
and Rabbits. Ames, Jowa, lowa State University Press,
1993.

Richardson Vi Rabbits: Health, Husbandry and Diseases.
Ames, lowa, lowa State University Press, 1999, 184 pp.

Richardson VCG: Diseases of Domestic Guinea Pigs. Ind
edition. Ames, lowa, Iowa State University Press, 2000,

52 pp.

Richardson VCG: Disewses of Small Domestic Rodents.
Ames, lowa, lowa State University Press, 1997, 240 pp.

   

 

180

Smith AJ: Husbandry and medicine of African hedgehogs
{Atelerix albiventris). J Small Exotic Anim Med 2:21-28,
1992,

Staley EC, Staley EE, Behr MJ: Use of permethrin as a miti-
cide in the African hedgchog (Atelerix albiventris), Vet
Hum Toxicol 36:138, 1994,

Zenner Lt Effective eradication of pinworms (Syphacia
att! ypbacia obvelata and Aspiciuluris tetrapteray
from a rodent breeding colony by oral anthelmintic ther-
apy. Lal Anim 32:337-342, 1998,

 

  

 

 
Section 12

PARASITES OF WILDLIFE

Important Parasites of Wildlife

Table 5

 

. Important parasites of selected wildlife species

 

Location

 

 

 
 

Host Genus and Species Common Name

Bears Baylisuscaris transfuga Intestine ‘Ascarid
Sarcoptes sp. Skin Mange mite
Trichinella spiralis Muscles Trichina worm
Ursicuptes americanus Skin Mange mite

Beaver Giardia sp. Intestine Beaver fever
Platypsyllus and Prolabiducarpus Skin Beaver beetles
Schizucarpus mingandi Skin Mites
Stichorchis sp. Cecum Ceeal fluke

Bighorn sheep

Bison

Caribou/ Reindeer

Coyote/Fox

Ducks

Otobius megnini
Protostrougylus spp.
Psoroptes ovis
Skijabinema ovis

 

Di
Fasciola hepatica

 

yocaulus viviparas

Fascioluides magna
Haemonchus contortus
Ocsophagostomum radiatum
Ostertagia ostertagi

Besnoitia sp.
Cephenemyia trompe
Cysticercus of Taenia krabbei
Dietyoeaulus hadiweni
Oedemagena tarandi
Parelaphostrongylus tenis

Dracunculus insignis
Eehinococets multilocularis
Filaroides (Osleris) osteri
Otodeetes eynotis
Physaloptera spp.
Sarcoptes seabiei

Amidostomiim spp.
Lencocytozoon simondi
Sarcocystis rileyi

Several tapeworms, trematodes,

acanthocephala (see McDonald, 1969a,

1969b, 1981 in bird Bibliography.)

181

In ear canal
Lung

Skin

Large intestine

Lungs
Liver

Liver
Abomasam
Large imestine
Abomasam

Skin
Nasal sinus
Mascle
Lungs
Under skin
Spinal cord

Uneler the skin
Intestine
Trachea

Ears

tomach

Skin

 

Gizzard lining
Blood
Muscles
Intestine

Spinous ear tick
Lungworms
Scabies
Pinworm

Lungworm
Liver fluke

Deer fiver flake

Large stomach worm
Nodular worm
Brown stomach worm

Protozoan cyst
Bot tly larva
Measles
Lungworm
BotsAvarbles
Meningeat worm

Subcutaneous worm
Alveolar hydatid tapeworm
‘Tracheal worm

Ear mite

Stomach worm

Mange mite

zard worms

 

Leucocytozoonosis
Rice belly
Several
Section 12

Table 54. Important parasites of selected wildlife spec

  

§ (continued)

Ne ee

 

 

 

 

 

Host Genus ancl Species Location Common Name

Eik Dictyocaulus spp. Tangs Lungworm
Elaeopbora sclmeideri Arteries Bloodworm
Fascioloides magna Liver Deer liver fluke
Parelapbustrongylus tennis Spinal cord/brain Meningeal worm
Psoroptes sp. Skin Mange mite

Fish Anasakis spp. (larvae) Muscle Cod worm
Dipbyllobothrium tatu Pleuracercoid in muscle ——_-Broacllish tapeworm
Diplostomum spp. (metacercaria} re fluke
Nanopbyetus salmincola (metacercaria) —_Kitney, eye, heart, etc. Salmon poisoning fluke
Phocanema spp. (larvae) Flesh Cod worm

Mink Alaria spp. Intestine Flake
Enparyphinnt spp. Intestine Fluke
Nanopbyetus salmincola Intestine Fluke
Paragonimus kellicotti Lungs Lung flake
Dioctopbyma renale Kidney Kidney worm
Filaroides martis Lungs Lungworm
Physaloptera spp. Stomach Stomach worm
Skrjabingylus nasicola Nasal sinus Nasal worm

Moose Dermacentor abipictus Moose or winter tick

Mountain goat

Mule deer

Muskrat

Opossum

Fascioloides magna
Parelapbostrongylus tenuis
Taenia krabbei (cysticercus)

Parelapbostrongylus odocoilei
Protostrongylus spp.
Skrjabinema ovis

Cephenemyia spp.
Elaeophora schneider
Fascioloides magna
Lipoptena spp.

Onchocerca cervipedis
Parelapbostrongylus odocoilei
Cysticercus of Taenia krabbei

Capillaria hepatica

Cysticereus of Taenia taeniaformis
Giardia sp.

Mites (numerous kinds)
‘Trematodes (numerous kinds)
Trichuris opaca

 

Brachylaima vir giniamun
Capillaria spp.

Cruzia american
Physaloptera turgida
‘Trypanosoma eruti

182

 

Spinal cord
Masele

Mascle
Lungs
Intestine

Retropharyngeal pouches
Arteries

Liver

Skin

Under skin

Mascle

Muscle

Liver
Liver
Intestine
Hair
Intestine
Intestine

Intestine
Lungs, intestine
Intestine
Stomach

Blood

Liver flake
Meningeal worm
Measles

Muscle worm
Lungworm
Pimvorm

‘Throat bots
Arterial worm
Large liver flake
Keds

Skin worm
Muscle worm
Measels

None (eggs in liver}
Liver cysts

Beaver fever

Mites

Flakes

Whipworm

Flake

Capillary worm
Pinworm
Stomach worm
Blood flagellate
Table $4. Important parasites of selected wildlife species (contimed)

Parasites of Wildlife

 

 

 

 

 

Host Genus and Species Location Common Name

Porcupine Dipetalonema sp. Uneler skin Skin worm
Monoecocestus sp. Small intestine Tapeworm
Sarcoptes sp. Skin Mange mite
Trichodectes setosus Hair Louse
Welleontia evaginata Large intestine Pinworm

Rabbits Cittotaenia spp. Intestine Tapeworm
Cysticercus of Taenia pisiformis Peritoneal cavity Larval tapeworm
Dirofilaria seapiceps Under skin Skin worm
Graphidiiun strigosimn Stomach Stomach worm
Obeliscoides cunniculi Stomach Stomach worm
Passalurns ambiguous Large intestine Pinworm
Protostrongylas spp. Lungs Laingworm

Raccoon Baylisascaris procyonis Small intestine Asearid
Crenosoma goblei Lungs Lungworm
Guathostoma procyonis Stomach Stomach worm
Dracunculus insignis Under the skin Subcutaneous worm
Physaloptera spp. Stomach Stomach worm

Reptiles Ascarids (many kinds} Intestines Ascarid
Kalicephalus spp. Intestines Hookworm
Opbionyssus sp. Skin Mite
Pinworms are very common Intestines Pinworms
Strongyloides sp. Intestine ‘Threadworm

Rodents Capillaria hepatica Liver (eggs) None

Striped skunk Baylisascaris colimnaris Small intestine Ascarid
Capillaria hepatica Liver (eggs) None
Physaloptera spp. Stomach Stomach worm
Skvabingylus spp. Nasal sinus Sinus worm

White-tailed deer Cephenemyia spp. Throat Throat bot
Fascioloides magna Liver Large liver fluke
Haemonchus contortus Abomasum Barber-pole worm
Linoguathus spp. and Solenopotes spp. kin Sucking lice
Lipoptena spp. kin Keds (wingless flies)
Tricholipleurus spp. kin Biting lice
Parelaphostrougylus andersoni Muscle Muscle worm
Parelaphostrongylus tenuis Meninges Meningeal worm

Wild cats Cylicospirura spp. Stomach Stomach nodular worm
Physaloptera spp. Stomach Stomach worm
Toxoplasma gondii Intestine/feces Toxo

 

Note: Many of the parasites of wild animals are the same as or similar to parasites in related ctomesticated animals.
      
   
   
 

Section 12

Parasites

To brain
To abomasum

§ To gut /feces

From lungs

= Cee

{st- stage larvae

Fig. 226a. Parelapbostron

Fig. 226b. Parelapbostrongylus tenuis (first-stage larvae in
feces).

184
Parasites of Wildlife

Parelaphostrongylus tenuis

Common name; Meningeal worm or brain worm (Metastrongyloidea-Protostrongylidae).

Adult size: 10-15 em. Prepatent period is 90 + 9 days.

Size of larvae: 300-400 pm, first-stage larvae in feces, with dorsal spine on kinky tail.

Importance: This is one of the most important parasites of wildlife. Acult P. tenuis live associated with the meninges on
the surface of the brain of white-tailed «eer. The parasite is essentially nonpathogenic to white-tailed cleer.
However, when infective larvae in snails are eaten by hosts such as moose, caribou, elk, mule deer, exotic species of
deer, Hamas, and comestic sheep and goats, the infection is often lethal because larvae damage the spinal cord and

  

brain and cause severe inflammatory reactions to the CNS, resulting in incoordination, paralysis, and death.
Presence of infected white-tailed cer in an ecosystem may severely limit the survival of other susceptible hosts (see
bibliography).

Diagnosis: At necropsy the adult worms are found on the brain of white-tailed deer or larvae in the the spinal cord or
brain tissue of susceptible hosts. Dorsal-spined larvae can be found in the feces of cefinitive hosts using the

 

Baermann funnel.
Note: There are closely related nematodes that also pass ctorsal-spined larvae in the feces of wikl ruminants (see
‘Table 55). There are still several unknown species of these worms, and there is consierable variation in the lengths
of the first-stage larvae. The clefinitive diagnosis is to find and ientify the acult parasites in the host. Some of the
adults are in the muscles (P. odocoilei, P. andersoni, Elapbostrongylus cervi, the lings (Varestrongytus alpenae,
Muellerius capillaris), or on the meninges of the brain (Parelapbostrongylus teratis).

Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC has been reported to be effective against early developing larval stages of P. teniis,
but is not effective against acult parasites. Prevention: ‘Ireatment every three weeks is recommenced to prevent in-
fection.

Table 55. Lengths of first-stage dorsal-spined larvac*

 

     

 

Elaphostrongylus cervé 375-490 jun Mean = 425 jum
Muellerius capitlari 240-340 um Mean = 280 jim
Parelapbostrongylus andersoni 310-420 jm Mean = 350 jun.
Parelapbostrongylus odocoilet 340-385 ktm Mean = 355 jim
Parelapbostrongytus tenuis 310-380 jum Mean = 350 jim
Varestrongylus alpenae 260-320 um Mean = 300 um

 

Note: See Gray et al., 1985, Can J Zool 63:1449-1454; Pybus and Shave, 1984, J Wildf Dis 20;:284-288,
*May not be accurate for ciagnosis.

185
 

‘Ze Dead ests
A re
Fascioloides — wetacercariae
magna

 

Eggsin manure

(Usualy fala in
6 months)

‘snad

   

Fig, 227a. Life cycle of Fascioloides magna. . - .
: z Fiy. 227b. Fascioloides magna epg.

Fascioloides magna’

   
  
    
    

Ver fluke or large American liver fluke (Fasciolidae).

50 jut x 70 pum , operculated, yellow. Prepatent period is 7 months.
‘This fluke is nonpathogenic in deer and elk. It is a fatal infection in domestic sheep and goats. Infected cat-
je, bison, and Jamas do not pass eggs (dead-end hosts). Reduced productivity is associated with infection in cattle.

_ Treatment in deer: Clorsulon, 7-21 mg/kg PO; less than 80% effective
Albendazole, 15 mg/kg PO; 90% effective
Triclabendazole, 20 mg/kg PO; more than 95% effective

 

Protostrongylus spp. o
a
Life Cycle oCg

Wu

Fig. 228a. Protostrongylus spp.

 

   

Fig. 228b. Protostrongylus sp. larva.

    
  
  
   
      
  

Protostrongylus spp.

Common name: Bighorn sheep lungworm (Metastrong yloidea-Protostrongy lidae).

Adult size: 10-20 mm.

Size of larva: 340-400 Jun x 20 jam, with straight, pointed tail. Prepatent period is 5 weeks.
Importance: The most important parasite of bighorn sheep. Transmitted transplacentally and may predispose to bacterial
pneumonia, especially in lambs. P. rxeshi is in the major air passages. P. stilesi is in the alveolar areas.
Diagnosis: Use Baermann funnel and look for first-stage larvae.

“Treatment: Fenbendazole, 10 mg/kg PO q 24h x 3d

Aermectin, 0.2 mgfkg SC

‘Albendazole, 15 mg/kg PO

186

 
Parasites of Wildlife

“ Coititon tame; Nerve or muscle cysts (Protozoa-Apicomplexa).
 Ustially microscopic, but some species, especially in ducks, elk, and rabbits, 1 mm or more,
Importance! Usually nonpathogenic, but large numbers may kill the host. Carnivores are the definitive hosts that pass thé
infective oocysts. These do not infect humans.
Diagnosis: Visual observation; usually by histology.
Treatment: None known; some ionophores such as monensin may ameliorate signs.

Fig. 230b. Psoroptes sp. (ong, jointed
pedicels).

 
   
 
    
 

Section 12

months.

Fig. 233. Trichinella spiralis larvae (attews) in muscle
(bear).

 

188

 
   
   
  
     
 

Elaeophoi'a schieider

Common name! Arteria
Adult size: 5-12 eni, form
to the heart. :
Importance; Found in mule'deer
genic. Transmitted by horse

filarial dermatitis, “sorehead,” may occu

sheep. In moose, blindness may occ
Diagnosis: Take a punch of ear skin, placed inisalme;*

look for live microfilariae.
Treatment: None.

Baylisascaris procyonis

Common name: Raccoon ascarid (Ascaridoidea).

Adult size: 12-23 em, in small intestine.

Size of egg: 80 jum x 70 um.

Importance: This ascarid causes visceral larva migrans
in humans and CNS disorders ina variety of
birds and animals. Humans should use hygienic

 

measures when working with raccoons and rac-
coon feces. Eggs are not infective when passed in
feces and require approximately 30 days or more
to become infective.
Diagnosis: Fecal flotation. (Similar to Toxocara canis in
dogs).
Treatment: Fenbendazole, 20 mg/kg PO q 24hx 5d
Mebendazole, 22 mg/kg PO q 24hx 5d
Piperazine, 200 mg/kg PO
Pyrantel, 10 mg/kg PO

Trichinella spiralis

Common name: Trichina worm (Trichuroidea}.

Larval cyst size: Up to 3: mm.

Importance: Transmissible to humans via ingestion of
meat. Found in many carnivores and other verte-
brates (see Fig. 163).

Diagnosis: Larvae are encysted in muscle. For tissue
squash, diaphragm is often used, or digest muscle
in 1% aeid pepsin and look for larvae under a
dissecting microscope. Histology is used for diag-
nosis.

Treatment: None in wildlife.
fish}.

 

 

189

Parasites of Wildlife

oo
a

ce
i a

mi
‘

a
oo ae

ari
Adult sizer Sev roiled int vfeshis

Importancé: A i cn

  

Prevention: Cac
Treatment: For,

 
  
     
 
  
 

importance: Found j in t a
throat in species

7 Eau

or more may be present, i “
Diagnosis: Visual at
Treatment: Ivermect
     
    
 

Mesocestoides sp.

  

Common name: Tapeworm (Pset
in felines and canines.
Size of egg: 50 Lum x 40 pm, with'int
Importance: These are acquired fror
hosts such as reptiles. Uncomiian, bu
Usually no pathogenicity associated: \
worms, but larval stages may be pathogeiiic.
Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation.
Treatment: Praziquantel, 5-50 mg/kg PO.

 

  

Cylicospirura sp.

Common name: Stomach worm (Spiruroidea).

Size of egg: 40 am x 30 jim.

Importance: Found in most wild felids. Causes large
(2-3 cm} nodules in stomach with red worms in-
side. Pathogenicity is unknown, but ulcers and
hemorrhage are sometimes associated with the
parasites.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation or nodules found in
stomach at necropsy.

Treatment: Unknown, but ivermectin or fenbendazole
may be effective.

{in cougars}.

Dirofilaria immitis

Common name: Dog heartworm (Filaroidea}. Found in
wild canines and occasionally felines.

Size of microfilaria: 310 mx 7 Jim.

Importance: Often fatal to coyotes, red wolves, and
wild canids.

Diagnosis: Microfilariae in blood (Knott’s test}.
Serologic tests (ELISA}. At necropsy, worms are
found in right side of heart.

Treatment: Melarsomine, 2.5 mg/kg IM, twice, 24 h
apart

Prevention: Ivermectin, 0.006 mg/kg PO every 30 d

(See dog heartworm section.}

 

 

Fig. 239. Dirofilaria immitis (in coyotes). Prepatent period
is 6 months.

190

  
 
 
  
 

Parasites of Wildlife

Importance: Very con

 
   
 
    

is unknown, but

 

ets FenbedaE
Niclosamide, 157 mg/kg)

Praziquantel, 2.5-5.0 ii

  
    
      
  
 

Linognathus africanu

Common name: Sucking lice (
Size of adults: 2.S-5.0 min: Lif
Importance: May cause hair:Jos
pruritus. Me
Diagnosis: Visua] observation in-hait,
to perform the examination is’ helptul
Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg IM, SC, or PO
Organophosphate, powders or sprays
Pyrethrin, powders or sprays

 

   

Lipoptena sp.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
   

Common name: Deer ked (Diptera}. This is a wingless
fly.

Size of adults: 3-6 mm.

Importance: Very common on deer and elk. Usually
nonpathogenic.

Diagnosis; Visual observation of hair. Keds are often in
pairs.

Treatment; Organophosphate, powders or sprays

Pyrethrin, powders or sprays

- Soboliphyme batirini

Common name: Marten stomach worm
(Dioctophymoidea).

Size of adulis: Up to 38 mm, heavy robust bodies, with

“a Well-developed buccal capsule.

Size of eggs: 94 Jam x 45 jum (our measurements}.

Importance: Large worms in the stomach of martens,
especially in Alaska. Closely related to the giant:
kidney worm of dogs. The pathogenicity is mia
known, but large numbers of worms are found.in'
healthy martens. :

Diagnosis: Necropsy or fecal flotation.

Treatment: Unknown.

 

   

Fig, 245. Sobolipbyme baturinieggs (in martens).

192
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
       
 
 
    

  

Parasites of Wildlife

Ursicoptes americanus

Common name: Mange mite of bears.

Size of adults: 265~359 jum x 130~150 jm.

Importance: Can cause clinical mange in captive and
free-ranging bears.

  

 

Diagnosis: Skin scraping to detect mites.

Treatment: Amitraz (0.025%) dip, every 2 weeks until
mites are no longer‘détécted. Ivermectin may be
effective. 3

   

on name: Bighorn sheep fringed tapeworm.
Size of egg packets: 174 juin x 145 jun.
Importance! Probably nonpathogenic, but may cause
bile“diiet proliferation and interfere with diges-
tion.
Diagnosis: Fecal flotation, or observe tapeworm seg-
ments on the fecal pellets. Adult tapeworms are

 

found in the bile ducts at necropsy.
Treatment: Fenbendazole, 10 mg/kg PO
Deruntacentor sp.

Common name: Seed ticks or larval ticks.

Adult size: 700 jim x 500 jum (6 legs}.

Importance: May cause infected animals to scratch,
may cause anemia, and may be responsible for
the transmission of diseases. Found on rodents
and many animals.

Diagnosis: :

Treatment: Dust with pyrethrins, permethrin, ca

bamates, or organophosphates:.°

 

isual observation.

 
  
Sarcoptes scabiei.

  
 

 
 

Common name: Mange mit
Adult size: 500 pm x 406 inn
Importance: Causes sarcoptic mang:

 
 
  
 

Affected animals experience ha
may occur, Common on foxes,

wolves. :
Diagnosis: Deep skin scraping; look for mites a
Treatment; Ivermectin, 0.2 mg/kg SC or PO!

   
     
     
 

Toxoplasma gondii

Common name; Toxo.

Size of pseudocysts: 20-35 jm.

Importance; Can be transmitted to humans.
Transmission occurs by cannibalism, ingestion of
oocysts, or congenitally. Cats are the only defini-
tive hosts, but all birds and mammals are suscep-
tible to infection and disease.

Disease: The disease is characterized by fever, anorexia,
lethargy, lymphadenopathy, myalgia, pneumonitis,
myocarditis, hepatitis, and encephalitis. Abortion
often occurs in ungulates.

Diagnosis: Identify pseudocyts in histological tissue sec-
tions, primarily CNS. Trophozoites can often be
seen see in amniotic fluid and other fluids.

= s

 

Fig. 250. Pseudocyst of Toxoplasma gondii (protozoa) can

be found in CNS of any wild bird or mammal. Treatment: Sulfas and pyrimethamine.
Prevention: Do not eat raw meat, and prevent oral in-

gestion of oocysts from cat feces.

Diphyllobothrian latum

Common name: Broad fish tapeworm
(Pseudophyllidea).

Size of egg: 75 jun x 45 pon.

Importance; Transmitted by eating infected fish. May
compete for vitamin B,,, but usually not patho-
genic. Common in bears.

Diagnosis: Eggs in fecal flotation or large tapeworm
segments in feces.

Treatment: Praziquantel, 5 mg/kg once PO (same for
humans).

Prevention; Do not eat raw fish.

  

‘bears and humans}.

   

194
   
  
  
  
   

Fig. 253. Numerous trematode eggs (P. wescotti) in brain
tissue.

fie: Bear brain fluke (Trematoda: Prouterinidae).
8 jun x 41 wm.

 

 

disease. It is very unusual for trematodes to enter neural tissue. Although the black bear may not be the natural
host, severe disease occurred. The complete case history is available (Foreyt et al., f Wild Dis 32:225-233, 1996}.

Diagnosis: The best diagnosis is to examine nasal sinuses of bears demonstrating neurologic signs and find the 2- to
4-mm trematodes. Eggs may float in sugar flotation. In histologic sections, eggs and adult trematodes can be seen in
brain and lungs.

Treatment; None known.

the foot of
fasites (1 mun
Ef section 2

  
 
   
 

 
   

Fig. 257, Protostrongylus sp. larvae in the hngs of
bighorn sheep {sce Fig. 228a and b, for life cycle and diag-
nosis).

 
  
   

 

They tisually bite and then
range and 1 mm long.

Rie Ls
Fig. 260. Anterior end of Thelazia sp. {the
eyeworm) from under the third eyelid of a
bighorn sheep.

Fig. 261, Typical muskrat mite {very common on
muskrats).

196

  
 
 

Fig. 262. Nematodirella sp. eggs from a musk ox.

Bibliography

Beynon PH (ed.}: Manual of Raptors, Pigeons and
Waterfowl. Ames, lowa, lowa State University Press,
1996, 364 pp.

Chapman JA, Feldhamer GA: Wild Manumals of North
America, Biology, Management, Economics. Baltimore,
Maryland, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982

Davidson WR (ed): Diseases and Parasites of White-tailed
Deer. Miscellaneous Publication No. 7, Tall Timbers
Research Station, Tallahassee, Florida, 1981.

Davidson WR, Nettles VF; Field Manual of Wildlife
Diseases in the Southeastern United States.
Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study, The
University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, 1988.

Davis JW, Anderson RC (eds): Parasitic Diseases of Wild
Animals, Ames, lowa, lowa State University Press,
1971.

Davis JW, Anderson RC, Karstad LH, Trainer DO (eds):
Infectious and Parasitic Diseases of Wild Birds. Ames,
Iowa, lowa State University Press, 197 1.

Dieterich RA (ed): Alaskan Wildlife Diseases. Institute of

Arctic Biology, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, Alaska,

1981.

“Forrester DJ: Parasites and Diseases of Wild Mammals in

Florida. Gainesville, Florida, University Press of

Florida, 1992, 459 pp.

“Fowler M (ed): Zoo and Wild Animal Medicin

ion. Philadelphia, WB. Saunders Co., 1986.

 

   
    
   
  

   

Ind edi-

Fig. 263. Several Lyzanaea spp. that are intermediate hosts
for liver flukes (Fascioloides magna).

Parasites of Wildlife

  
    

  

Fowler ME, Cubas ZS (eds.}: Biology, Medicine and
Surgery of South American Wild Animals. Ames, lowa,
Iowa State University Press, 2001, 572 pp.

Friend M (ed): Field Guide to Wildlife Diseases. Resource
Publication 167, U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish
& Wildlife Science, Washington, D.C., 1987.

Heidenreich M: Birds of Prey: Medicine and Management.
Ames, lowa, lowa State University Press, 294 pp
1997.

Levine ND: Veterinary Protozoology. Ames, lowa, lowa
State University Press, 1985 4114 pp.

Petrak Mi (ed): Diseases of Cage and Aviary Birds.
Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1982.

Samuel WM, Pybus M {eds.|: Parasitic Diseases of Wild
Mammals, Ind edition. Ames, Iowa, lowa Stare
University Press, 2001, 568 pp.

Stocker L. Practical Wildlife Care. Ames, lowa, lowa State
University Press, 2000, 296 pp.

Thorne ET (ed): Diseases of Wildlife in Wyoming.
Wyoming Game and Fish Department, Cheyenne,
‘Wyoming, 1982.

Wallach JD, Boever WJ: Diseases of Exotic Animals ~
Medical and Surgical Management. Philadelphia, W.B.
Saunders Co., 1983.

Williams ES, Barker IK (eds.}: Infectious Diseases of Wild
Mammats. 3rd edition. Ames, lowa, lowa State
University Press, 2001, 576 pp.

Wobeser G: Diseases of Wild Waterfowl. New York,
Plenum Press, New York, 1981.

   
   
  
Section 13

PARASITES OF MARINE MAMMALS

Marine Mammals

 

Fig. 265, Marine mammals (Cetacea}: whales, dolphins, porpoises.

199

Dyn
007

 

DI pv

Table 56. Major parasites of pinnipedia (seals,

Major Parasites

sca lions, and walruses)

 

Table $7, Major parasites of cetacea (whal

   

dolphins, and porpoi

 

 

 

 

 

     

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

Parasite Location Parasite Location
Trematodes Trematodes
Cryptocotyle Intestine Braunina Stomach and intes
Zaloplotrena Liver Campida Liver
Pricetrenta Intestine Fasciola Liver
Hadwenins Intestine
Leveasiclla Intestine
Intestine Nasitreme Air sinus and brain
Phyllobothriton Tissue Qdbneriella Liver
Pholeter Stomach
Nematodes
Anisakis Stomach Cestodes
Ascari Intestine Diphyllobothriun Stomach and intestine
Contracaeciumn Stomach Phyflobothriin Blubber
Dipetalonema Heart Strobilocephalus Intestine
Dirofilavia Heart Tetraabothrius Intestine
Ostostrongylis Lung Trigonocotyle Intestine
Parafilaroides Lung
Porrocaecum Stomach Nematodes
Terranova Stomach Anisakis Stomach and intesting
Uneinaria Intesting Contracaceium Stomach and intestine
Crassicauda Kidney, muscle, and urogenital system
Acanthocephala Halocerens Lung
‘orynos Inte: Pharuris Air sinus, lung, and heart
Phocanerna Stomach
Ectoparasites Psetdatins Lung and heart
Antarctophthirus (louse) Stenurus Hronel
Echinophthirins (louse) Terranova Stomach
Hatarachne (nasal mite}
Lepidophthirns (louse) Acanthocephala
Corynosoma Stomach and intestine

Ectoparasites
Cyamus (lows

 

 

Skin

 

ET vols
 
   
 
 
 

arasites of Marine Mammals

te (heartworm preventative}, 5 mgfkg'daily: ladi
7 rm prevention}, 0.006 mg/kg every 30 days

ime arid flukes), 10 mg/kg PO
Olng/kg PO

   
   
 

nal parasites
roncit (tapeworms and flukes), 10 mg/kg PO
Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO

 
 

HWermectin, 0.2 mg/kg PO
Levamisole, 10 mg/kg PO
Niclosamide (tapeworms), 110 mgfkg PO
Piperazine, 55 mg/kg PO

 

Internal Parasites

   

 

Nee
oe

Otostrongylus sp. Paraftlaroides sp.
270-420 x 19-24 jan 240-265 % S215; jun
105 mm x 1.3 mm : 9.
140-160 mm x 2 mm
Bronchi, trachea, heart Lung parenchyma

Less severe (piigiimdnia): . Severe (brdiichiolar obstruction}

 
   
  
 

  
 
    

 
  
    
        
  
   
  
 

  
   
    

 

Nematodes (roundwei

Nammals are
common. The ascarid’g:

are usually infected by eating infected fa
The adult parasites are usually large
stomach or intestines. Adult worms are 310 cin, |
Most dewormers listed in Table 58 are’ effective for
treatment. HOS
Prevention for humans is to cook fish well before:
eating. Pyrantel is used to treat humans.

 

Trematodes (flukes) are also common in marine
iiammals. Examples are listed in Tables 56 and 57.
“oc Eggs are usually operculated at one end.

Acanthocephala are spiny-headed worms and are
found commonly in the intestines of marine mammals.
Their spiny heads are firmly imbedded in intestinal mu-
cosa. Acanthocephalans often appear yellow or orange
at necropsy.

Tapeworms (cestades) are common in marine
mammals. The broad fish tapeworm (Diphyllobot brine
sp.) is especially common in those animals that eat fish.
Pseudophyliidean tapeworms like DipbyHlobothrism
spp. are the most common type of tapeworm in marine
mammals and have operculated eggs. Tapeworms are
often nonpathogenic and can be treated with prazi-
quantel.

 

Fig. 271, Typical tapeworm eggs.

202

 
   

Fig. 273. Brasina cordiformis (trematode}, 165 pm x
97 \un. Photo by M. Dailey. Used with permission,

   
     
 

   

Fig. 274. Zalopbotrema he paticrn (trematode), 73 mx Fig. 275. Corynosoma sp. (acanthocephala}, 79 int x
48 ym. Photo by M, Dailey. Used with permission. 24 yum. Photo by M. Dailey. Used with permission.

Fig. 277. Syuthesiam sp. (trematode), 56 ym x 33 1m.
Photo by M, Dailey. Used with permission,
   
   

Fig, 278. Airis Fig. 279. Contracaecum sp. (nematode-ascarid}, SO jun x
Photo, by M. Dailey: Used with permission. 5O jm. Photo by M. Dailey. Used with permission.

a

Ae, Fig: 280. Crassicauda sp. (nematode). Eggs are larvated,
5S yun x 37 pm. Photo by M. Dailey. Used with permis-
sion.

 

 

Fig. 283. Orthohalarachne attenuata, Mites are in the na-

trachea. Photo by M. Dailey. Used with sopharynx. Photo by M. Dailey. Used with permission.

 
  

monia.

 
   
 

Treatment: Ivermecti
Fenbendazole, 50

  
   
  
   
    
   
 
 

Fig, 285. Otostrongylus sp. (hingworm larva) nematode.
Photo from M, Daiky. Used with permission.

Uncinaria lucasi
Name: Hookworm (nemat

Size of eggs: 135 pm x 85 pin;
Importance: Hookworms arel

Transmitted transmamma
mortality in pups (Lyons;1994
Treatment: Ivermectin, 0.2 mg

Fenbendazole, 50 mg/kg PO.

205

 
Dv

Section 13

bibliography

Brown RJ, Smith AW, Keyes MC: Sarcocystis in the north+
em fur seal. J Wild] Dis 10:53,1974.
Brown RJ, Smith AW, Keyes MC, ct al.: Lesions associated

with fatal hookworm infections in the northern fur seal.

AVMA 165:804, 1974.

Conlogue GJ, Ogden JA, Foreyt W/]: Pedicnlosis and se-
vere heartworm infection in a harbor seal. Vet
Med/Small Anim Clin 75:1 184-1187, 1980.

Dailey MD, Brownell RL: A checktist of marine parasites.
In Ridgway SH (cdl}: Mammals of the Sca. Charles C.
‘Thomas, 1972, pp. 528-566.

Dailey MD: Discases of Mammalia: Cetacea. In Kinne O
(ed): Diseases of Marine Animals, Vohime 1V, Part 2.
Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany, Biologische
Anstalt Helgotand, 1985, pp. 815-841.

Dailey MD: Parasitology ~ Basic Considerations (Cetacea,
Pinnipecia and Sirenia). In Fowler ME (cdl}: Zoo and
Wald Animal Meslicine. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders
and Co., 1986, pp, 781-789.

Eky TJ: Dipetalonema spirocanda in Alaskan marine
mammals, J Wildl Dis 17:65, 1981.

Forrester 1D}: Parasites and Discases of Wilk Mammals in
Florida, Gainesville, University Press of Florida, 1992,
459 pp.

Gosselin JF, Measures, 1. Redescription of Filaroides
(Parafilaroides) gymnurus (Raillict, 1899) (Nematodaz
Metastrongyloidea), with comments on other species in
pinnipeds, Can } Zool 75:359-370, 1997.

Howard EB, Britt JO Jr, Matsumoto GK: Parasitic dlis-
cases. In Howard EB (cd}: Pathobiology of Marine
Mammal Diseases, Vohime 1. Boca Raton, Florida,
CRC Press, Inc., 1983, pp. 119-232,

Hsu CK, Melby EC, Altman NH, et al. Coccidiosis in
harhor seals. JAVMA 164:700, 1974.

Inskeep W, Gardiner CH, Harris RK, Dubey JP, Goldson
RT: Toxoplasmosis in Atlantic bortle-nosed dotphins
(lursops truncatus). | Wildl Dis 26:377-382, 1990.

 

 

 

Johnston DG, Ridgway SH: Parasitism in some marine

mammals. JAVMA 15.
Kim KC, Haas V1, Keyes MC: Populations, microhabitat

 

206

preference, and effects of infestation of two species of
Orthohatarchne (Halarachnidac:Acarine) in the north-
em fur seal, J Wildl Dis 16:45, 1980.

Kinne 0: Diseases caused by parasites. In Kinne O (ed):
Discases of Marine Mammals. Hamburg, Federal
Republic of Germany, Biologische Anstalt Helgoland,
1985, pp. 717-750.

Lanckner G: Discases of Mammalia: Pinnipedia. In Kinne
© (ecl}: Diseases of Marine Animals, Volume 1V, Part 2.
Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany, Biologische
Anstalt Helgoland, 1985, pp. 713-754.

Lyons ET: Vertical transmission of nematodes: Emphasis
on Uncinaria hicasi in northern fur seals and
Strongyloides westeri in cquids. | Helminthol Soc Wash
61:169-178, 1994.

Measures 1, Gosselin JF. Helminth parasites of ringed scal
Phoca hispida from northern Quebec, Canada. J
Hehninthol Soc Wash 61:240-244, 1994,

Morimitsu T, et als Parasitic octavus neuropathy as a
cause of mass stranding of Odontoceti. J Wildl Dis
72:469-472, 1986.

Merimitsu “I, ct al.: Histopathology of cighth cranial nerve
of mass stranded dolphins at Goto Istands, Japan. J
Wild! Dis 28:656-658, 1992.

Onderka DK: Prevalence and pathology of nematode in-
fections in the hings of ringed seals (Phoca hispida of
the western Arctic of Canada. | Wikll Dis 25:2 18-224,
1989.

Perry ML: A new specics of Dipetatonema from the

 

California sea fion and a report of microfilariac from a
Stellar sca tion (Nematoda:Filarioidea). J Parasit
53:1076, 1967.

Strond RK, Dailey MD: Parasites and associated pathology
observed in pinnipeds stranded along the Oregan coast.
J Wikll Dis 14:292, 1978.

Taylor AER, Brown DH, Heyneman D, ct alz Biology of
filariel nematode Dipetatonema spiracanda (Leidy,
1858) from the heart of captive harbor seals and sea fi-
ons, together with pathology of the hosts, J Parasit
47.971, 1961.

Woodward JC, Zam $G, Caldwell DK, et a
sitic diseases of dotphins. Patho! Ver 6:257,

 

ome para-
, 1969.

 
nt

 

Fig. 287, Reptiles (snakes and lizards).

2: NH
Sa
Sa

 
Section 14

Major Parasites

Table 60. Parasites of reptiles (snakes and lizards}

Location

Parasites

 

Parasites Location
Protozoa Nematodes
Entamoeba invadens Intestine Ascarids: Ophidascaris,

 

imeriaMsospora spp. (coccidia}

Cryptosporidium sp.

Blood protozoa (Haemopratens,
Hepatozoan, Plasmodium

Hagellates: Trichomonas,
Leishmania Trypanosoma

Ciliates: Balantiditon sp.

Trematodes (renifers)

Lechriochis sp.
Dasymetra sp.
Ochetostoma sp.
Stomatremia sp.
Zeugorehis sp.
Styphylodora sp.
Spirorchistt caredius sp.

Cestodes

Psendophyllideans: Botbridinmn,
Bothriocephalus, Spirometra

Spargamam larvae (plenrocercoids}

Mesocestoides larvac
(retrathyridia}

Prateacephalus, Acauthotaenia,
Crepidobothritn:, Opbiataenia

Intestine/extra-intestinal

lotestine
Blood or tissues.

Blood or tissues
Intestine
Lumgsfintestine

Lungs
Oral cavity
Oral cavity
Oral cavity
Stomach
Urinary tact

Circulatory system

Intestine

Mhseles/5Q
Anywhere

Intestine

Polydelphis, Hexametra
Hookworms: Kalicephalus

Filarial worms: Oswaldofilaria,

Foleyella, Macdonaldius
Capillaria sp.
StrongyloidestRhabdias

Pimvorms (oxyurids) :
several species

Spirurids: Abbreviata,

Lustrongyloides larvac,

Physaloptera spp.

 

 

Acanthocephala
Sphacrechinarbynchus sp.

Mites
Ophionyssus natricis

Extonyssus, Opbiopnenmicola

Ticks
Amblyona, Aponomma,
Hyalonuna, Ornithodoros

 

Fly
Sarcapbaga

Jarvac

Pentastomes (several species}

Intestine/stomach

Intestine

Limgs/SQ/
circulatory system

Intestine

Intestine

Intestine

$Q¢hmgs

Intestine

Skin
Lungs

Skin

5Q

Lungs

 

Table 61. Parasites of reptiles (turtles and alligators)

 

 

 

Po
ES
i

urtles/ Tortoises
Nema

todes
Augusticaecum sp.
Camallanus sp.
Sprionoura sp.
Spiroxys sp.
Kalicepbalus sp.
Proatractis sp.

 

ematodes
Dictyangium sp.
Heronimus sp.
Neapolystoma sp.
Telorchis sp.

Acanthocephala

Nevechinarbynchns sp.

Protozoa

Entamoeba invacens
Eimeria spp.
Balantidium sp.

Location

Intestine
Intestine
Colon
Colon
Intestine
Colon

Stomach
Lungs

Urinary bladder
Intestine

Intestine

Intestine
Intestine
Intestine

Alligators/Crocodiles

Nematodes
Brevimulticaecum sp.
Dujardinascaris sp.

 

Trematodes
Acanthostomum sp.
Archaeodiplostomun sp.
Crocodilicala sp.
Palycotyle sp.
Pseudocrocodilicola sp.

Pentastomes
Sebekia sp.

Leeches
Placabdetla spp.

208

 

Stomach
Intestine/stomach

Intestine
Intestine
Intestine
Intestine
Intestine

Lungs

Mouth/skin
   
   

Se &

3 ae
Fig. 290. Eggs of hookworms (Kalicephalies sp.) frota =
rattlesnake. Nematode eggs are 80 jum x 40 jim.

  
   
     

SPREE ee Sor
pes of Kapsultaenia sp. (tapeworm). Epes are Fig. 292. Eges of a pmworm (probably Pharynxgodon sp.
7(:{tii. Photo by S. Barnard. Used with permis- (nematode), 87 Jim x 42 jum. Photo by $. Barnard: Used:
os with permission.

     

   

ig, 293. Eggs of a trematode (Ocetosoma sp.). Eggs are Fig. 294. Eggs of Strongyloides sp., a nematode. Eggs are
401i x 22 on. Photo by §, Barnard. Used with permis. 72 jum x 35 jm. Photo by S. Barnard. Used with permission.

209
  

Fig. 297, Eggs of Oswalderuzia sp., a hookworm (nema-
tode), Eggs are 78 am x 45 wm. Photo by $. Barnard.
Used with permission.

Fig. 299. Eges of Tachygonetria sp. a pinworm (nema-
ide} contition in turtles/tortoises. Eggs are 105 pm x

 

 

210

  

   

Fig. 296. Eggs of Capillaria sp., a nematode from a:rat-
tlesnake. Eggs are 80 pm x40 pm, ‘

Fig. 298. Eggs of Pharyngdon sp., a pmworm (nematode)

common in lizards. Eggs are 142 pum x 35 ym. Photo b}
Barnard. Used with permission.

   

=.

 
   

Fig. 300. Eggs of Oochoristica sp. a tapeworm front
lizard. Eggs are 40 um x 32 pm. Photo by $. Barnard.
Used with permission. :
Cty ptosporidiamn Fig, 302. Cysts of Balantic
unin diameter.

between 50 and 100 jum.

Digs for reptiles*

from a rattlesnake. Cysts are usually

     
 

Parasites of Reptiles

a

ig. 303. Eimeria sp. (coccidia) fro
rattlesnake. Oocysts are 20 jum x
18 pm.

jt SP.

 

 

Drug

Dosage (mg/kg of body weight)

 

  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 

des Dichlorvos (Task)

: Fenbendazole (Panacur)

Ivermectin (Ivomec), NO TURTLES
Levamisole HCL (Tramisol)
Mebendazole (Telmin)

Pyrantel pamoate (Strongid T)

Bunamidine (Scolaban)
Dichlophen (several names)
Niclosamide (Yomesan)
Praziquantel (Droncit)

None are reliable
Experimentally, Praziquantel or
Albendazole can be tried.

Dimetridazole (Emtryl)
Metronidazole (Flagyl)
Sulfadimethoxine (Albon)
Sulfamethazine

DriDi (a silica dessicant)
Dichlorovos “no pest strip”
Ivermectin (Ivomec)

12S
50
0.2
10
25
25

50
200
150
7S

10 (for flagellates, 5 days)
125-275 (for amoebae, 8 days)
45-90 (for coccidia)

40-75 (for coccidia)

Topical application
Hang in cage for a few hours
0.2 SQ, IM, or PO

 

for tiirtles.

211

 

    
    

Ine
     
 

  

Fig. 304. An imknowh petitastome (weird parasite). Eggs are Fig. 305. Entomoeba sp. (arrow) from a rattlesnake.

95 um x 78'ttit: Photo by S. Barnard. Used with permission.

 
  
 
 

Internal Parasites

Entomoeba sp.

  

‘Coimmon name: Entomoeba sp. (a protozoan—amoeba).

Size of trophozoite: 9-38 ym x 8-30 um.

Size of cyst: 9-24 jun in diameter, with one to four nuclei.

Transmission: Ingestion of cysts from affected feces

Importance: Can cause anorexia, weight loss, blood and mucus in feces, vomiting, and intestinal ulceration. It is most
pathogenic in snakes and carnivorous lizards. Death often occurs 2 to 10 weeks after infection.

Prevention: Cysts can survive more than 2 weeks in the environment. Keep cages clean and quarantine sick animals. Do

 
      

      
      
  
 
 
 

not mix lizards or snakes with turtles or crocodilians.
Treatment: Metronidazole, 125-250 mg/kg q 24h x 3 d. Do not exceed 400 mg per day.
Paromomycin, 40 mg/kg P@

Parasites of Animal Tissues, U.S. Dep. Agriculture
Handbook No. 651, Washington, DC 83 pp, 1988.

Bibliography

    
    

Ayala $C. Checklist, host index, and annotated bibliogra- Klein TA, Young DG, Greiner EC, Telford SR, Butler JF!
phy of Plasmodit from reptiles. } Protozool, Development and experimental transmission of :
25:87-100, 1978, Schellackia golvani and Schellackia occidentalis by in=
Barnard SM,SJ Upton: A Veterinary Guide to the gestion of infected blood-feeding arthropods. Lat foo.
Parasites of Reptiles. Volume 1, Protozoa. Malabar, Parasitol, 18:259-267, 1988.
Florida, Krieger Publishing Company, 1994. Lichtenfels JR and Lavies B: Mortality in red-sided garte
Mf Brownstein DG, Standberg, JD, Montaili, RJ, Bush, M, snakes, Thanmophis sirtalis parietalis, due to larval
Fortner J: Cryptosporidinm in snakes with hypertrophic nematode Exsstrongylides sp. Lab Anin: Sci 26:465,
=P gastritis. Vet Pathol 14:606, 1972. 1976. a
Cooper JE: Disease in East African snakes associated with Marcus LC: Veterinary Biology and Medicine'of Co

 
  
 

Kalicephalus worms (Nematoda: Diaphocephalidae). Amphibians and Reptiles. Philadelphia; Lea a0

Ver Rec $9:385, 1971. Febiger, 1981.
Flynn, RJ: Parasites of Laboratory Animals. Ames, lowa, Telford SR: Parasitic diseases of reptiles. J. Airs Ve
Iowa State University Press, 1973. Assoc, 159:1644-162, 19716035
Fowler M (ed): Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine, 2nd edi- Telford SR: Haemoparasites of reptiles.

tion. Philadelphia, W. B. Saunders Co., 1986, FL, Jacobsen ER (eds): Diseases of An
Frank W; Endoparasites. In Cooper, JE, Jackson, OF (eds): Reptiles. New York, Pleniiiiit Pres

Diseases of the Reptilia, Vole 1, London, Academic Zwart P, Truyens EHA: Hesamitiasi

Press, 1981, pp. 291-358. Parasitol, 1:175-1835'1978, |

Gardiner CH, Fayer R, Dubey JP: An Adlas of Protozoan

  
   

212
Section 15

PARASITES OF HUMANS

Location of Major Parasites

 
 
   
 
 
    
      
 

Taenia solium - cysticerci

Pediculus humanus (hair)
Sarcoptes scabiei in skin

Paragonimus westermani

hydatid cyst of Echinococcus
Fasciola hepatica

 

Large Intestine

Trichuris trichiura

Small Intestine

Giardia sp.
Cryptosporidium sp.
Ascaris lumbricoides
Necator americanus 5

Strongyloides stercoralis © a

Taenia spp. Pthirus pubis (hair)

Dipylidium caninum
Diphyllobothrium latum

Enterobius vermicularis
Schistosoma spp. {in veins}

Fig. 306, Location of the common parasites of humans.

213
Section 15

Common Parasites

 

 

 

 

Table 63, Common human parasites
Organism Parasite or Disease Treatment Dose
Protozoa
Giardia Giardiasis Furazolione 100 mg q 6hx7~-10d
Metronidazole 250 mg q Shx 5d
Paromomycin 8-35 mgfky q Shx 7d
Secnidazole 2 gonce or 30 mg/kg once
Tinidazole 2 g once or 30 mgfkg once
Cryptosporidium Cryprosporidiosis Paromomycin 5 mgfkgq Shx 7d
Supportive therapy Fluids and electrolytes
Nematodes
Ascaris Roundworm Albenclazole 400 mg once
Ivermectin 12 mg once
Mehenclazole 100 mg q 12hx 3d
Pyrantel pamoate 11 mg/kg once (maximum fg}
Piperazine 75 myfkg (maximum 3.5 g)
Enterobius Pinworm Albendazole 400 mg once, repeat in 2 weeks
Mebendazole 100 mg once, repeat in 2 weeks
Pyrantel pamoate 11 mg/kg once (maximum I g),
repeat in 2 weeks
Necator Hookworm Albendazole 400 mg once
Pyrantel pamoate 11 mg/kg (max | g)q 24hx 3d
Mebendazole 100 mgq 12hx3d
Strongyloides Threadworm Ivermectin 0.2 mg/kg q 24 hx 2d
Albendazole 400 mgq I2hx3d
‘Trichuvis Whipworm Albendazole 400 mg once
Mebendazole 100 mgq 12hx3d
Cestodes
‘Taenia saginata Beef tapeworm Praziquamtel 5-10 mgykg once
Taenia sotinm Pork tapeworm Praziquantel 5-10 mg/kg once
Taenia solinm (cysts) Cysticercosis Praziquantel 50 mgfkg q 24hx 14d
Mbendazole 5 mgikg q Sh x 28-30 d
Surgery
Dipylidium Flea tapeworm Praziqnantel 5-10 mg/kg once
Ecbinococeus Hydatid eyst Albendazole 400 mg q 12 hx 28d
Mebendazole 40 mg/kg daily for months
Surgery
Diphyllobothrinn Fish tapeworm Praziquantel 5-10 mg/kg, once

214
human' parasites (contiiied}

Parasite or Disease

Treatment

 

= Liver'fluke

Blood fluke

‘Sivimmer's itch

© Scabies

Body and head louse

Pubic louse

Bithionol
Praziquantel

Bithionol
Praziquantel

Oxamniquine
Praziquantel

Certicosteraid cream

Ivermectin

Permethrins
Ivermectin

Permethrins

7. Ascaris lumbricoides Fig. 308. Exterobius vermicularis
vormis), Eggs are 80 jum long. {pinworms}. Eggs are 75 jim long.

(protdzoan}; Oocyst:
nately 5 yun long (arro

30-50 mykg qd 8 hx 14:
25 mg/kg q Shx2d

15 mgfkg, once
40-60 mg/kg q Sh x1d

Topical

0.2 mgfkg

0.2%
0.2 mgfkg

0.2 %

 
  
    
 
    
      
   
 
   

  

Common name: Human hea
Adult size: 2-3 mm on the head:
are attached to the hairs:

  

Importance: These are sucking lice
They cause itching of the scalp: These
host specific in humans.

Diagnosis: Find the eggs, adults, or nymphs on'the
head. ;

Treatment: See Table 63.

Permethrin shampoos are the standard treatment, but
many lice are resistant.

  

  

is (head louse).

Pthirus pubis

Common name: Pubic lice.

Adult size: 1 mm, with large claws, in pubic hair. Eggs
(nits) are attached to pubic hairs.

Importance: These are sucking lice and suck blood.
They cause itching of the pubic area. These lice
are host specific in humans.

Diagnosis: Find the eggs, adults, or nymphs in the pu-
bic area.

Treatment: See Table 63.

Permethrin shampoos are commonly used.

Sarcoptes scabiei

Common name: Scabies mites.

Adult size: 400-600 um. Adults, nymphs, larvae (6
legs), and eggs are in the skin

Importance: Cause severe itching (“Norwegian itch”).
Human scabies mites are relatively host specific in
humans.

Diagnosis: Skin scraping. Find eggs, larvae, nymphs, or
adults.

Treatment: See Table 63

Ivermectin is often effective.

216
Bibliography

Bell TA, ‘Treatment of Pedicrlus bumanus var, capitis infes-
tation in Cowlitz County, Washington, with ivermectin
and the LiceMeister comb. Pediatr Infect Dis }
17:923-924, 1998,

Burkhart KM, Burkhart CN, Burkhart CG: Update on

therapy: ivermectin is available for use against lice.

Infect Med 14:689, 1997."

Campbell WC: Ivermectin, an antiparasitic agent. Med Res
Rev 13:61-79, 1993.

Coleman R: The use of ivermectin in the treatment of sca-
bies. Ir Med J 89:167, 1996.

Downs AM, Stafford KA, Coles Gi

 

Susceptibility of
British head lice, Pediculus capitis, to imidacloprid and

fipronil. Med Vet Entomol 14:105-107, 2000.

Glazion P, Cartel JL, Alzicu P, ct al: Comparison of iver-
mectin and benzyl be

Trop Med Parasitol 4

 

zoate for treatment of scabies.

31-332, 1993.
Glaziou P, Nyguyen LN, Moulia-Pelat JP, ct al.

 

 

217

Parasites of Humans

   

ivermectin for the treatment of head lice (Pedieulosis
capitis), Trop Med Parasitol 45

3-254, 1994,
Goddard J: Physicians Guide fo Arthropods of Medical

bnportance. 3rd edition. Boca Raton, Florida, CRC
Press, 1999, 440 pp.

Huffam SE, Currie BJ: Ivermectin for Sareaptes seabiei by-

perinfestation, fat J Infeet Dis 2152-154, 1998.

Meinking Tl, Taplin D, Hermida JL, et alt The treamment
of scabies with ivermectin. N Eng! { Med 3
1993.

 

 

6-30,
Ottesen EA, Campbell WC: Ivermectin int human medi-
cine. f sbutimicrolh Chemother 34:195-203, 1994,
Rahman Wa: Comparative tials using alhendazole and

   

mebendazole in the treatment of helminths in school-

children on Penang, Malaysia, Sontheast Asiun { Trop
Med Public Health 2 5-767, 1996.

Youssef MYM, Sadaka HAH, Eissa MM, et alz Topical

 

application of ivermectin for human ectoparasites. Ant f
Trop Med Hyg 53:652-653, 1995.
roscopic seeds and

 
  

) are often confused with

a

 

Fig. 324. Thrips (free-living insects) found occasionally in
dog feces when collected from the ground.

wy 4 Ae

   

Fig 3 326. An incidental mite tAcares sp.) end Acarus sp.
eggs in feces. Eggs are approximately 100-130 pm long.

220

            

Fig. 323. Spyrogyra (an algae), “bedspring artifact’
(arrow).

 

Fig. 325. Grain mite eggs with mite inside egg. Grain mites
occur in feed, and eggs pass in feces. Eggs are big, usually
over 1.00 Jun long.

 

Fig. 327, Ascaris foreyti, 1,778 mm long.
ie
Ce
Nee

Mites and mite eggs are often seen in feces. Some
of these mites are environmental mites that are ingested
and pass out in feces. Some mites are the result of ani-
mals licking themselves, and some mites are spurious
parasites that are the result of ingesting prey species
that have mites. This mite is Cnemidocoptes, a bird
mite in dog feces. Apparently, this dog ate an infected
bird.

aR
a

 

 
Section 17

TABLES

Table 64. Metric /

 

glish conversion factors and measures of concentration

 

Metric / English Conversion Factors

 

 

 

Tkg = 1,000g = 221b
lg = 1,000 mg = 0.035 oz
i = 1,000 ml or ce = 1.058 qt
1 ml or ce = 0.034 fluid oz
Im] = 1,000;d
1 Lof water weighs 1 kg
English / Metric Conversion Factors
TIb 453.68 = 0.454 kg
1c = 28.358
1 pt of water weighs approximately 1 tb
I gal of water weighs approximately $.34 Ib
1 gal = 4qt = 37851
lat = 2pt 0.946 1
1 pt = 04731
1 fluid 07 = 29.6 ml orce
Measures of Concentration

Tppm = IplA

= 1 yilkg

= 0.0001%

0.013 oz in 100 gal of water
1 percent = 10,000 ppm
10 gf

= 1.33 oz by weight/gal of water

= 8.34 Ih/100 gal
0.1% = 1,000 ppm = 1,000 ml/l
0.01% = 100 ppm = 100 mi/l
0.001% = 10ppm = 10m
0.0001% = I ppm = 1mlA

 

cc, cubic centimeter; g, gramy gal, gallon; kg, kilogram; |, liter; Ib, pound; mg, milligram; ml, milliliter; oz, ounce;

ppm, parts per million; pt, pint; qt, quart; 1, microliter.

223
Section 17

Table 65. Temperature, length, anc volume conversion chart

 

 

 

 

Temperature Length Vohime

°C °F cm mum inch liters quarts
100-212 2.54 25.4 1 1 La
90 194 5.08 50.8 2 2 24
80 176 10.16 101.6 4 3 3.2
70 158 203.2 8 4 42
60 140 304.8 12 5 5.3
50 122 40.64 406.4 16 6 6.3
40 104 50.80 508.0 20 7 7A
35 95 60.96 609.6 24 8 8.5
30 86 7112 7ALA2 28 9 9.5
25 7 81.28 812.8 32

20 68 91.44 914.4 36

1s 59

10 50

5 41

0 32

-5 23

-10 14

~15 5

20 +4

“25-13

300-22

40-40

Table 66, Abbreviations usec in text

 

BID ‘Twice a day

BW Body weight

Complete blood count

Central nervous system

Day

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Hour

Intramuscular(ly}

Intravenous(ly}

By mouth

 

ppm Parts per million
q Every

Sc Subcutaneously
sD Standard deviation

 

224
INDEX

Numbers in bold italic represent species description.
When a comma precedes spp., more than one species

 

form is given.

Abbreviations used in text, 224
Abdominal worm, 95
Acanthocephata, 201, 203

classification of, 12
Acariasis

in cats, 92

in dogs, 19

in pigs, 139
Aelurostrongytus abstrustes, 56, 57
Alaria spp., 30, 31
Algae, in feces, 220
Alligators, parasites of. See Reptiles, parasites of
Alveolar hydatid disease, 19
Amblyonmna, 168
Amoebiasis, 19
Ancylostoma spp., 19, 50

in cats, 54,55

in dogs, 22, 23, 50
Anisakis/Phocanema (Pseudoterranova) spp., 189
Anisakis sp., 201, 204
Anoplocephata, spp. 121, 130, 131
Antarctophthirus sp., 204
Anthelmintics

for birds, 156, 157

for cats, 53

for cattle, 77, 78

for dogs, 20

for goats, 78

for hedgehogs, 171

for horses, 124, 125, 132, 133

for humans, 214

for Hamas, 116

for marine mammals, 202

for pigs, 140

for rabbits, 171

for ratites, 167

for reptiles, 211

for sheep, 78
Arachnida, classification of, 13
Argas persicus

in birds, 164

m ratites, 168
Arterial worm, 188
Arthropoda, classification of, 13
Artifacts in feces, 219-221
Ascariasis, 139

225

Index

Ascarid (roundworm)

in birds, 153, 158, 159

in cats, 50, 54, 55

in dogs, 19, 2t, 22, 23

in bnmans, 214

in pigs, 137, 242, 143

in ratites, 168, 169

in reptiles, 209

in wildlife, 188
Ascuridia, spp. See Ascarid (romdworm)
Ascaris suum, 137, 142, 143
Ascarops strongytina, 137, 146

Babesia, spp.
in cats and dogs, 47
in dogs, 44
diagnosis of, 4
in horses, 130, 131
in ruminants, 92, 93
Baermann technique, 6
Batantidiums, spp.
in pigs, 137, 148
in reptiles, 211
Baylisascaris, spp.
i ratites, 168
in wildlife, 188
Bear brain parasite, 195
Bears, parasites of, 181, 193, 194, 195. See also
Wildlife, parasites of
Beaver, parasites of, 181, See also Wildlife, parasites of
BID, defined, 224
Bighorn sheep, parasites of, 181, 187, 193, 196. See
also Wildlife, parasites of
Birds
anthelmintics for, 156, 157
zoonotic diseases associated with, 154
Birds, parasites of, 153-165
body, location on, 154
coccidia species table, 155
external, 163-165
fecal eggs and oocysts, 153
internal, 158-162
Bison, parasites of, 181, See also Wildlife, parasites of
Bladderworm. See Capillaria, spp. aerophita, in cats
Blood smear for parasite detection, 4, 7
Blowfly, 99
Bolbosoma sp., 203
Bot fly
in cats and dogs, 41
incattle, 99
in sheep, 100
Bovicola, spp., 102, 103
 

index

Brain worm, 194. See also Meningeal worm
Braunina cordiformis, 203

Brisket worm, 94

Broad fish tapeworm, 194

Binostomunt, spp. 84, 85

BW, defined, 224

Calibration of microscope, 8
Camelostrongylus, 117
Canine babesiosis, ticks as vector of, 44
Capillaria, spp.
in birds, 153, 158, 159
in cats, $0, 56, 57
in dogs, 37
in lamas, 115, 117
in reptiles, 210
in ruminants, 86, 87
Caribou (reindeer), parasites of, 181. See also Wildlife,
parasites of
Cassowaries, parasites of, See Ratites, parasites of
Cats, parasites of, 51-62
external
ear mite, 43
fur mite, 43
mange mite, 62
fecal eggs and oocysts, $0
internal, 54-61
ascarid (roundworm), 50, 54, 55
bladderworm, 56, 57
coccidia, 50, 61
flea tapeworm, 50, 58, 59
Giardia canis, 64
hookworm, 54, 55
lung fluke, 56, 57
Iingworm, 56, 57
Sarcocystis sp., 60
tapeworm, 50, 58, 59
toxo, 60
location on host body, 51
protozoan parasites, 47
Cats, wild, parasites of, 183, 196. See also Wildlife,
parasites of
Cattle
anthelmintics for, 77, 78. 79
zoonotic diseases of , 70
Cattle, parasites of. See also Cattle, sheep, and goats,
parasites of
coccidia in, 69
fecal eggs and oocysts, 69
location on host body, 70
Cattle, sheep, and goats, parasites of, 69-108
external, 97-108

226

flies, 98-101
lice, 102-103
mites, 105-108
ticks, 104-105
internal, 80-97
abdominal worm, 95
Babesia, 92,93
bankrupt, or small stomach, worm, 80, 81
barber's pole (wire worm), 80, 81
beef cysticercosis, 95
bighorn sheep lungworm, 88, 89
brisket worm, 94, 95
brown stomach worm, 80, 81
capillary worm, 86, 87
cattle bankrupt worm, 84
caccidia, 92, 93
crypto, 92, 93
Cysticercus tennicollis, 96
esophageal worm, 94, 95
gid, 97
goat lungworm, 88, 89
hair worm (black scour worm), 84
hookworm, 84
hydatid cyst, 96
large-mouthed bowel worm, 86, 87
liver fluke, 90, 91
lungworm, 88, 89
Neopspora canimun, 92, 93
nodular worm, 82, 83
rumen fluke, 95
sheep eysticercosis, 97
skin nodular worm, 94, 95
sorehead, 97
tapeworm, 90, 91
tapeworm, fringed, 96
thin-necked intestinal worm, 82, 83
threadworm, 82, 83
trich, 90, 91
trichostrongyle parasites, 85
whipworm, 86, 87
Cattle bankrupt worm, 84, 85
CBC, defined, 224
Cecal worm, 158, 159
Centrifugation, modified double, 5
Cephenemyia sp. 189
Cercarial dermatitis, [54
Cestodes. See also Zoonotic diseases
classification of, 13
in gerbils, 172
in hamsters, 172
in mice, 173
in ratites, 168
in rats, 174
in reptiles, 211
Cotacea, parasites of, 199-205. See also Marine
mammals, parasites of
list of species, 200
Chabertia, spp., 86, 87
Chandlerelta quiscali, 168
Cheyleticlla spp.
in cats, 43 .
in dogs, 19, 43
in rabbits, 43, 177
Chickens, parasites of, 155. See also Birds, parasites of
Chigges, larval, 48
Chiggers, 196
Chirodiscoides caviae, 179
Choanotaenia spp., 160, 161
Chorioptes, spp., 106, 107
Classification of parasites, 11-13
Cnemidocoptes muttans, 163
CNS, defined, 224
Coccidia. See Fimeria, spp. tsospora, spp.
Cochtiomyia, hominivorax, 99
Cod worm, 189
Codiostomum: struthionis, 168

 

 

Concentrations, measures of, 223
Contracaecum sp., 201, 204
Conversion tables, 223-224
Cooperia, spp.
in Hamas, 117
in ruminants, 84, 85
Corynosoma sp., 203
Cows. See Cattle
Coyote, parasites of, 181, 190, 194. See also Wildlife,
parasites of
Crassicauda sp., 204
Crayfish, as hosts of giant kidneyworm, 38
Crocodiles, parasites of. See Reptiles, parasites of
Cryptosporidium, spp.
indogs, 40
in hamsters, 178
in humans, 214, 215
life cycle, 75
in Hamas, 118
oocysts, 76
in ratites, 168, 169
in reptiles, 2 11
in ruminants, 92, 93
Ctenocephalides, spp., 168
Cutaneous larva migrans
in cats, $2
in dogs, 19, 22
in humans, 19
in pigs, 139
Cutancous Icishmaniasis, 19

227

Index

Cuterebra spp., 41

Cyathostonuun sp., 126, 127

Cylicocephalus sp., 126, 127

Cylicocyelus sp.. 126, 127

Cylicospirura sp., £90

Cyrnea colini, 168

Cysticercosis, 95

Cysts, nerve or muscle (Protozoa-Apicomplexa), 187
Cytauxzoon sp.,47

Damatinia (Bovicola) sp. 119
Davainea spp.. 168
Deer ked, 192
Deer, parasites of, 189, 192. See also Wildlife, parasites
of

mule, 182, 188

white-tailed, 183-185
Deletrocephalus spp.. 168, 169
Demodex canis, 42
Dentostomella spp., 178
Dermacentor, spp. 132, 193
Dermanyssus gallinae, 164
Diagnosis of parasitic infections, 3-8
Dicheilonema spp., 168
Dictyocanlus, spp.

in horses, 121

in ruminants, 88, 89
Dioctophyma renale, 38
Dipetalonema reconditum, 26, 28, 29
Diphyllobothrinn, spp.

in dogs, 37

in humans, 214

in marine mammals, 201

in wildlife, 194
Diplyditun, spp.

in cats, 50, 58, 59

in dogs, 17, 19, 32, 39

in humans, 214
Dipylidiasis

in cats, 52

in dogs, 19
Dirofflaria imnnitis

in cats, $2

comparison of microfilariae with Dipetalonema

reconditum, 26

diagnosis of, 4

in clogs, 19, 24, 25

treatment protacol for, 27

in wildlife, 190
Dirofilariasis

in cats, $2

in dogs, 19
Index

Diseases associated with parasites. See Zoonotic
diseases
Dispharynx sp. 153
in birds, 165
Dogs
anthelmintics for, 20
zoonotic diseases of, 19
Dogs, parasites of, 17-45
body, location on, 18
external, 39-45
biting louse, 39, 48
brown dog tick, 44
ear mite, 43
flea, 40
follicular mange mite, 42
fur, or surface, mite, 19, 43
mange mite, 19
Neospora caninum, 45
Rhipicepbalus sanguinens, 44
rodent botfly, 4
sucking louse, 39
ticks, 44
internal, 21-38
Alaria canis, 17
Ancylostoma caninum, 17
anthelmintics for, 20
ascarid (roumdworm). See Texocara, spp-5
Toxascaris leonina
Capillaria aeropbila, 17
caccidia, 34, 35
deer or moose tapeworm, 33, 36, 37
Dipetalonema reconditum, 26, 28, 29
Dipylidium caninunt, 17, 19, 32, 39
esophageal warm, 38
eyeworm, 38
fecal eggs and oocysts, 17
flea tapeworm, 19, 32, 39
fox lingworm, 37
Giardia canis, 34
guinea (or dragon) worm, 37
heartworm, 19, 24, 25
hookworm, northern, 24, 25
hookworm, southern, 19, 22, 23
intestinal fluke, 30, 31
Isospora canis, 17
Isospora obioensis, 17
lung fluke, 30, 31
Mesocestoides sp., 17
Nemopbyetus salmincola, (7
Phyaloptera praeputialis, 17
salmon poisoning fluke, 17, 30, 31
Sarcocystis spp., 34, 35
stomach worm, 28,29
Taenia sp. 17

228

tapeworm, 32, 33, 36,37
threadworm, 19, 24, 25
Toxascaris leonina, 17
Toxocara canis, 17
tracheal worm, 28, 29
‘Trichuris vulpis, 17
Uncinaria stenocephala, 17
whipworm, 22, 23
protozoan parasites, 47
Dracunculus spp. 37
Dromuaestrongylus, 168
Drugs for external parasite control
on humans, 215
on pigs, 141
on raminants, 79
Drugs for internal parasite control. See Anthelmintics
Ducks, parasites of, 155, 181. See also Birds, parasites
of; Wildlife, parasites of

Ear mites, 43
Echinacaccasis, 52
Echinococcus, spp. See also Taenia, spp.
in dogs, 19, 32, 33
in dogs and cats, 49
im humans, 214
hydatid eyst, 49
in ruminants, 96
Eimeria, spp.
in birds, 153, 155, 160, 161
in cattle, 69
in hedgehogs, 176
im horses, 121
in Mamas, 115, 118
in pigs, 137, 146
in ratites, 168
in reptiles, 211
in ruminants, 92, 93
in ruminants, life cycle, 74
in sheep and goats, 71, 72
Elaeopbora, spp.
in ruminants, 97
in wildlife, 188
Elaplostrongylts spp., 191
ELISA, defined, 224
Elk, parasites of, 182, 192, 195. See also Wildlife,
parasites of
Emus, parasites of. See Ratites, parasites of
Eaterobius sp.,in humans, 214, 215
Entontoeba, spp.
in dogs, 19
in reptiles, 212
Esophageal worm
in dogs, 38

 
in ruminants, 94
Ether-formalin sedimentation technique, 6
Exrytrenut sp. 196
Eyeworm, 38, 196

Fainalges, 165
Fasciola be patica, detection of, 6
Fasciola, spp.
in humans, 215
in ruminants, 90, 91
Fascioloides magna, 186
Fecal eggs and oocysts, relative sizes
in birds, 153
in cats, 50
in dogs, 17
in horses, 121
in amas, 115
in pigs, 137
Fecal samples
collection of, 3
flotation of, 4
Feeal seclimentation technique, 6
Feces, artifacts in, 219-221
‘ola substratus, 39, 48
Filarioides, 28, 29
Fish, as hosts of giant kidneyworm, 38
Fish, parasites of, 182. See also Wildlife, parasites of
Flatworms, classification of, 12-13

 

Fleas
in cats and dogs, 40
in guinea pigs, 175
in hedgehogs, 176
key to, 41
list of species, 40
in mice, 173
in pigs, 150
in ratites, 168
Flea tapeworm.
in cats, 50, 58, 59
in dogs, 19, 32, 39
Flies
on pigs, 150
‘on ratites, 168
on ruminants, 98, 99-101
Flotation of fecal sample, common solutions, 5
Flukes. See also Trematodes
flukes, duck, 155, 215
flukes, intestinal, 30, 31
slukes, liver
in ruminants, 90, 95
in wildlife, 186
flukes, lung. See Paragonimus spp.
flukes, rumen, 95

229

Index

Follicular mange mites, 42
Fox, parasites of, 181, 194. See atso Wildlife, parasites
of
Iungworm, 37
Fur mites, 43

Gabucinia spp. 168
Gapeworm, 153, 160, 161
Gastropbilus spp., 123, 128, 129
Geese, parasites of, 155. See also Birds, parasites of
Gerbils, list of parasite species, 172
Giant kidneyworm, 38
Giardia, spp. 215

in birds, 153, 165

in cats, 61

in dogs, 34

in humans, 214, 215

isolation of, 3,7

in mice, 179

in ratites, 168
Gid tapeworm

in dogs, 36

in ruminants, 97
Gliricola sp., 178
Guathostoma sp. 49
Goats

anthelmintics for, 78, 79

zoonotic diseases of, 74
Goats, parasites of. See Sheep, parasites of
Gongylonema spp.

in pigs, 147

in naninants, 94
Goniocates spp.. 163
Gordius sp., in feces, 221
Guinea (or dragon} worm, 37
Guinea pigs, list of parasite species, 175
Gullet (esophageal) worm, 147
Gyalocepbalus, 126, 127

Habronema, spp.

in horses, 121, 128, 129

in ratites, 168
Haemabartonella spp., 47
Haematopinus, spp.

in pigs, 149

in ruminants, 102
Haenonebus, spp.

in Hamas, 117

in ruminants, 80, 81

in sheep and goats, 71
Haemophysalis spp., 168
Haemoprotens sp., 153, 165
Index.

Hair worm (black scour worm), 84, 85
Hamsters, list of parasite species, 172
Heartworms
diagnostic/treatment protocol, 27
in dogs, 19, 24-27
interpretation of test results, 26
in wikl canids, 190
Hedgehogs, list of parasite species, 175-176
Hematocrit method, for detecting microfilariae, 7
Hepatozoon canis, 47
Heterakis gallinarum, 158, 159
Histomonas, spp.
in birds, 159
in ratites, 168
Hookworm, 54
in eats, 55
in dogs, 19, 22-25
in reptiles, 209
in ruminants, 84, 85
Horsehair worm, in feces, 221
Horses, parasites of, 121-133
external, 132-133
internal, 126-131
ascarid (roundworm), 128, 129
Babesia sp., 130, 131
bot fly, 128, 129
fecal eggs and oocysts, 121
pinworm, 126, 127
stomach worm, 128, 129
strongyle, large, 126, 127
strongyle, small, 126
tapeworm, 130, 131
threadworm, 130, 131
location on host body, 122
Houtinynia, sp. 167, 168
Human parasites, 213-216
external, 216
internal, 214-215
location on body, 213
Hyclaticl eyst clisease
in dogs, 19
in ruminants, 96
Hyostrongylus rubidis, 146
Hypoderma lineatum, 99

IM, clefined, 224
Insecta, classification of, 13
Intestinal fluke, 30, 31
Intestinal worm, thin-necked, 118
Isolation techniques of parasites, 6,7
fsospora, spp.

in birds, 153

in cats, 50, 61

230

in dogs, 34, 35
in pigs, 137, 144, 145
in ratites, 168

IV, defined, 224

Kalicepbatus sp., 209
Kapsultaenia sp. 209
Knott's test to cletect microfilariae, 7

Laboratory animals, parasites of, 171-179
Lagocheilaseariasis, in cats, 52
Lagocheilascaris minor, 52
Large-mouthed bowel worm, 86, 87
Larvae, orsal-spined, comparison of lengths, 185
Leishmania donovani, 19
Leucocytozoon, spp.
in birds, £62
diagnosis of, 4
in ratites, 168
Libyostrongylus spp. 168
Li

  

on eats, 39, 48

on dogs, 39

on guinea pigs, 175

on horses, 123

on Tamas, 119

on marine mammals, 204

on mice, 173

on pigs, 149, 150

on ratites, 168

onrats, 174

on ruminants, 102, 103

on wildlife, 192
Linognathus, spp.

on dogs, 39

on ruminants, 102, 103

on wildlife, 192
Lipoptena sp., 192
Listropborus sp., 177
Lizards, parasites of. See Reptiles, parasites of
Llamas, anthelmintics for, 116
Llamas, parasites of, 115-120

external, 119-120

fecal eggs and oocysts, 115

internal, 117-118

location on host body, 116
Lig fluke. See Paragoninus, spp.
Lungworm

in bighorn sheep, 88, 89

in cats, 50, 56, 57

in cattle, 88

in dogs, 37
in goats, 88, 89
in marine mammals, 202, 205
in pigs, 137, 144
in ruminants, 88, 89
Lymnaea spp. as hosts of liver flukes, 197

Macracanthorbynchus, spp.
classification of, 12 a
in pigs, 137, 138, 147
Mange mites
in cats, 62
in dogs, 42
Marine mammals, parasites of, 123, 189, 199-206
Acanthocephala, 201
cestodes, 201
flukes, 201
hookworm, 205
lungworm, 205
nematodes, 201, 204, 205
tapeworm, 201
trematodes, 201, 205
Marten stomach worm, 192. See also Giant kidney
worn
MeMaster technique, modified, 6
Melophagus ovinus, 108
Menacanthus spp., 163
Meningeal worm
in amas, 120
in wildlife, 184, 185
Menopon spp., 163
Mesocestoides sp., 190
Metastrongytus sp. 137, 144, 145
Metric/English conversion factors, 223
Mice, list of parasite species, 172
Microfilariae. See also Heartworms
diagnosis of, 4
Microscope, calibration of, 8
Mink, parasites of, 182. See also Wildlife, parasites of
Mirothoracius sp., 119
Mites
on bears, 193
on cats, 43, 62
detection technique, 7
on dogs, 42, 43
on gerbils, 172
on guinea pigs, 175
on hamsters, 172
on hedgehogs, 176
on Hamas, 119
on marine mammals, 204
on mice, 173, 174
on muskrats, 196
on pigs, 150

231

Index

on rabbits, 43, 172
on ratites, 168
on rats, 175
on ruminants, 105-108
on wild canids, 194
on wildlife, 187
Mites, in feces, 220, 221
Modified double centrifugation, 5
Modified McMaster technique, 6
Moniezia, spp.
in ruminants, 90, 91
in sheep and goats, 71, 90
Monvecocestus sp. 191
Moose, parasites of, 182. See also Wildlife, parasites of
tapeworm, 36
Mountain goat, parasites of, 182. See also Wildlife,
parasites of
Muellerins capillaris, 88, 89
Musea, spp. 100
Muskrat, parasites of, 182. See also Wildlife, parasites
of
mites, 195
Myiasis, 123
Myocoptes musculinus, 177

Nanopbyetus salmincota, 30, 31, 49
Nasitrema sp. 205
Necator sp., 214
Nemathelminthes, classification of, 11
Nematodes. See also Zoonotic diseases

classification of, 11-12

in gerbils, 172

in guinea pigs, 175

in hamsters, 172

in hedgehogs, 175-176

in marine mammals, 201, 204, 205

in mice, 173

in rabbits, 172

in ratites, 168

in rats, 174

in reptiles, 209, 210, 211
Nematodirella sp., 197
Nematodirus, spp.

in Hamas, 118

in ruminants, 82, 83

in sheep and goats, 71
Neorickettsia helinintheca, 30
Neospora, spp.

in dogs, 45

in ruminants, 76
Nodular worm, 82, 83
Notoedres cati, 62

 
Index

Ocetosoma sp., 209
Oesophagostonuim, spp.
in Hamas, 117
in pigs, 137, 142, 143
in ruminants, 82, 83
Oestrns ovis, 100
Onchocerca, spp 94, 189
Onothonyssus spp-, 176
Oochoristica sp., 210
Ophidascaris sp., 209
Opposum, parasites of, 182. See also Wildlife, parasites
of
Ornithonyssus sp., 48
Orthobalarachne sp., 204
Osteragia, spp.
in Namas, 117
in ruminants, 80, 81
in sheep and goats, 71
Ostriches, parasites of. See Ratites, parasites of
Ostwalderuzia sp., 210
Otobius megnini, 168
Otodectes cynotis
in dogs, 43
in ferrets, 179
in hedgehogs, 176
Otostrongylus sp., 202, 205
Oxyuris equi, 121, 126, 127

Paragonimiasis, 52
Paragonimus, spp.

in cats, 56, 57

in dogs, 30, 31

in humans, 215
Paralges sp.. 168
Parampbistomum sp., 95
Paranoplocephata mamiltana, 121
Parascaris equorum, 121, 128, 129
Parasitic infections, diagnosis of, 3-8
Parelapbostrongylus tenuis

in Hamas, 120

in wildlife, 184, 185
Paroncbocerca struthionns, 168
Passalurus ambiguous

in rabbits, 176

in wildlife, 196
Pediculosis, transient, 154
Pediculus hominis, 215, 216
Percent, as a measure of concentration, 223
Pharyngodon sp., 209, 210
Pheasants, parasites of. See Birds, parasites of
Philopbthatmus gralli, 168
Phocanema, 201
Physaloptera, spp.,28, 29, 210

232

Pigeons, parasites of. See Birds, parasites of
Pigs
anthehnintics for, 140
drugs for external parasites, 141
Pigs, parasites of, 137-150
body, location on, 138
external, 149-150
fecal eggs and oocysts, 137, 147
internal, 142-148
ascarid (roundworm), £42, 143
coceidia, 144, 145, 146
gullet (esophageal) worm, 147
lungworm, 137, #44, 145
nodular worm, 142, 143
spiny-headed worm (thorny-headed worm), 137,
147
stomach worm, 146
swine kidney worm, 147
tapeworm, pork, 148
threadworm, 144, 145
trichina worm, 139, 148
whipworm, 142, 143
Pinnipedia, parasites of, 200. See also Marine
mammals, parasites of
Pinworm
in humans, 214
in reptiles, 209, 210
in wildlife, 191, 196
Plant material in feces, 219-22 |
Plasmodium, spp.
in birds, 153
in ratites, 168
Platyhelminthes, classification of, 12-13
Pneumocystis carinii, 19
Pueumonyssus caninum, 48
PO, defined, 224
Pollen, in feces, 219
Polyplax serrata, 177
Porcupine, parasites of, 183, 191. See also Wildlife,
parasites of
Porpoises, parasites of, 200. See afso Marine mammals,
parasites of
ppm, defined, 223, 224
Preservation of parasites, 4
Pricetrema zalophi, 203
Protalges sp. 165
Protostrongylus, spp., 186
in bighorn sheep, 88, 89
in wildlife, 196
Protozoan parasites. See also Zoonotic diseases
classification of, 11
diagnosis of, in blood, 4
in dogs and cats, 47, 52
in gerbils, 172
in guinea pigs, 175

in hamsters, 172

in mice, 173

im ratites, 168

in rats, 174

in reptiles, 214
Prouterina wescotti, 195
Psorergates, spp.

in mice, 178

im ruminants, 108
Psoroptes, spp.

in rabbits, 177

in cuminants, 106, 107

in wildlife, £87
Prerolichidae spp., 168
Pthiras pubis, 215, 216

Q, clefined, 224

Rabbits, parasites of, 183. See also Wildhfe, parasites
of
Cheyletiella parasitavorax, 43
imeria, spp. 171
list of parasite species, 172
mites, 43
Raccoon, parasites of, 183, 188, 195. See also Wildlife,
parasites of
Raillietina spp., 160, 161
Ratites, parasites of, 167-169
Rats, list of parasite species, 174-175
Reptiles
anthelninties for, 21 1
Reptiles, parasites of, 183, 207-212. See also Wikllife,
parasites of
fecal eggs and oocysts, 209-211
list of parasite species, 208
Rhipicepbalus sp.
in dogs, 44
in ratites, 168
Rickettsial disease (salmon poisoning), 30
Roclent bot fly, 42
Rodents, parasites of, 41, 183. See also Laboratory
animals, parasites of; Wildlife, parasites of
Rounchvorms. See Ascari (roundworm)
classification of, 11-12
Ruminants, parasites of, See Cattle, parasites of Cattle,
sheep, amd goats, parasites of; Sheep, parasites of

 

Salmon poisoning fluke, 30, 31, 49
Sarcocystis, spp.
in birds, 165

233

Index

in cats, 60
in dogs, 34, 35
life cycle, 71
in wildlife, 187
Sarcomastigophora (Protozoa), classification of, 11
Sarcoptes scabiei
in dogs, 19
in guinea pigs, 178
in humans, 215, 216
in Mamas, 119
in pigs, 149
in ruminants, 106, 107
in wildlife, 194
Sarcosporidiosis, 139
SC, defined, 224
Schistosoma spa 215
Serewworm, 99
SD, clefined, 224
Sea lions, parasites of, 200, See alsa Marine mammals,
parasites of
Seals, parasites of, 200. See also Marine mammals,
parasites of
Sedimentation techniques, 6
Seeds, in feces, 219, 221
Setaria cervi, 9S
Sheep
anthelmintics for, 78, 79
zoonotic cliseases of, 74
Sheep, parasites of. See also Cattle, sheep, and xoars,
parasites of
body, location on, 73
coccidia, compared with those in goats, 73
fecal eggs and oocysts, 71
kedl (sheep tick), 108
tapeworm, 36
Sinulinm, 168
ipbona (Haematobia) irritans, 101
Skin scraping technique
for detection of mites, 4, 7
Skin worm
in ruminants, 94
in wildlife, 189
Skunk, striped, parasites of, 18.
parasites of
Smear, clirect, for parasite detection, 7
Snakes, parasites of. See Reptiles, parasites of
Soboliphyme baturini, 192
Solenoptes, spp. 102
Solutions, flotation, i parasite detection, 5
Sarehead, 97
Sparganosis, 52
Spiny-headed worm (thorny-headed worm}
in marine mammals, 201, 203

  

See also Wildlife,

 

in pigs, 147
Index

Spirocerca Inpi, 38, 49
Spirometra sp., 58, 59
Stephanofilaria spp., 94
Stephanurus dentatius, 147
Stomach worm

in dogs, 28

in pigs, 146

in ruminants, 80, 81, 84, 85

in wildlife, 190
Stomoxys calcitrans, 101
Strongyloides, spp., 209

in dogs, 19, 24, 25

in horses, 121, 130, 131

in humans, 214

in lamas, 117

in pigs, 137, 144, 145

in raminants, 82, 83, 85

in sheep and goats, 71
Strongyloidiasis, 19
Strongylus vulgaris, 126,127
Struthiofilaria megalocepbala, 168
Struthiolipenrus spp., 168
Swine kidney worm, 147
Syngamrs trachea

in birds, 153, 160, 161

in ratites, 168
Syathesiui sp., 203

Tabanus spp., 101
Tables, conversion, 223-224
Tachygonetria sp. 210
Tacniasis-cysticercosis, 139
Taenia, spp. See also Echinococcits, spp.

in cats, 50, 58, 59

in dogs, 32, 33, 36, 37

in humans, 214

life cycle of T: saginata, 71

in pigs, 148

in ruminamts, 95, 96, 97
Tapeworm

in birds, 160, 161

in cats, 50, 58, 59. See also ‘Taenia, spp.

classification of, 13

in dogs, 19, 32-33, 36, 37
in hamans, 214

in marine mammals, 201
in pigs, 148

in porcupines, 191

in rabbits, 172

in reptiles, 209, 210

in ruminants, 90, 91

in sheep, 36

in wildlife, 190

234

‘Tapeworm, broad fish, 37
Tapeworm, fringed

in bighom sheep, 193

m ruminants, 96
Temperature conversion chart, 224
‘Terranvova, 201
Texas cattle fever, 92
Thelazia, spp.

in dogs, 38

in wildlife, 196
Thin-necked intestinal worm, 82, 83
‘Thomy-headed worm, 12
‘Threadworm

in dogs, 19, 24, 25

in pigs, 144, 145

in ruminants, 82, 83
Thrips, in feces, 220
Thysanosoma actinoides, 96
Ticks—key, 104

in dogs, 44

in hedgehogs, 176

in pigs, [50

m satites, 168

in ruminants, 104, 105
seed or larval, 193
Toxascaris leonina

in cats, 50, 54, 55

in dogs, 22, 23
Toxo. See Toxoplasma gondii; Toxoplasma, spp.
‘Toxocara, spp.

in cats, 50, 54, 55

in dogs, 19, 21
‘Toxoplasma gondii, life cycle, 75
‘Toxoplasma, spp.

in cats, 50, 52, 60

in cats and dogs, 47

in pigs, 139

in ratites, 168, 169

in wildlife, 194
Toxoplasmosis

in birds, 154

in cats, 52

in pigs, 139
Tracheal worm, 22, 23, 28, 29
Transient pediculosis, 123
Trematodes. See also Zoonotic diseases

classification of, 12-13

in dogs, 30-31

eggs, detection of, 6

in marine mammals, 201, 203, 205

in rabbits, 172

in ratites, 168

in reptiles, 209, 211
Trich. See Tritrichomonas, spp.
Index

Trichinella spiralis (Trichina worm} Wellcomia evaginata, 191
in pigs, 139, 148 Whales, parasites of, 200. See also Marine mammals,
in wildlife, {85 parasites of

Trichinosis, 139 Whipworm. See Trichiris, spp.

Trichobilharzia spp., 15S Wildlife, parasites of, 181-197. See also Birds,

Trichodectes canis parasites of; Deer, parasites of; Wolves parasites of
in dogs, 39 arterial worm, 188
in dogs and cats, 48 ascarid (roundworm), 188

Trichomonas, spp. bear brain parasite, 195
in birds, 153, 162 chiggers, 196
in dogs and cats, 49 cod worm, 189
in ratites, 168 cysts, nerve or muscle (Protozoa-Apicomplexa) in,

Trichostrongylus, spp- 187
in Hamas, 117 deer ked, 192
in ruminants, 80, 81, 84, 85 deer throat bot, 189
in sheep and goats, 71 eyeworm, 196

Trichuris, spp. fluke, liver, 186
in dogs, 22, 23 heartworms, 190
in humans, 214, 215 lice, sucking, 192
in Hamas, 117 list of species, 181-183
in pigs, 137, 142, 143 lungworm, 196
in ruminants, 86, 87 marten stomach worm, 792
in sheep and goats, 71 meningeal worm, 184, 185

Tritrichomonas, spp. 49, 90, 91 mites, 187, 193, 194

Trixacarus caviae, 175, 178 pinworm, 197, 196

Trombicula sp., 196 skin worm, 189

Trypanosoma, spp. stomach worm, 190
in cats and dogs, 47 tapeworm, 190, 191
in dogs, 19 tapeworm, broad fish, 194
in mice, 178 tapeworm, fringed, 193

Trypanosomiasis ticks, seed or larval, 193
in cats, 52 toxo, 194
in dogs, 19 Wire worm, 80
in pigs, BO in ruminants, 81

Tur keys, parasites of, 155. Sze also Birds, parasites of Wolves, parasites of, 190, 194. See also Wildlife,

Turtles, parasites of. See Reptiles, parasites of parasites of

Whyominia tetoni, 193
Uncinaria sp., 205
Uncinaria stenocephata, 24,25 Yeast, in feces, 220

Ursicoptes americanus, 193

Zalophotrema hepaticum, 203

Visceral larva migrans Zoonotic diseases
in cats, 52 . associated with birds, 154
in dogs, 19 associated with cats, 52
in humans, 19 associated with cattle, 70
Visceral leishmaniasis, 19 associated with dogs, 19

associated with horses, 123
associated with sheep and goats, 74
Walruses, parasites of, 200. See also Marine mammals, associated with humans, 214
parasites of

235
ee as muerte Leet
tory, animalsy ‘as,welllas ais a marine. mamma!
= 97 aril EN STE ecdeckent Pea ientrcpty +7 "
owl ast Sian artifacts Cpt iy) yiel En are puaemith eu the isa ass
n x i

poy Feet cometh ec
fell Sections CHIE ned ieee ene NUTTER

ISBN D-6138-2419-2

MON Lr

 
