1. 2. 2021 Requirements for passing the course / credit INTRODUCTION TO HELMINTHOLOGY characteristic, classification; DIGENEA (TREMATODA) – morphology, classification and life cycles. Order ECHINOSTOMIDA.  100% active attendance of the students at practical lessons. One failure to attend a practice (documented by a doctor) can be justified by the teacher.  Successful completion of continuous checks of study (student must obtain at least 51%) - one test during the semester with a score of 100 points and evaluated according to Art. 20 point 4 of the Study Program of the UVLF in Košice on the issue of Helminthology (practical lessons).  Attendance at lectures 60%. Compensation of practical exercises : in agreement with the teacher, in the 13th week of SS. Consultation : in agreement with the teacher (depending on teaching and research activity). Ongoing evaluation Credit test from Helminthology, 15 th April 2021 , 10 th week of SS. Final rating : At the end of the semester, credit is entered into the AIS system; Practical and oral exam. Practical exam is necessary to continue with oral exam. In the event of an unfavourable epidemiological situation, the practical test is omitted; the questions will be reflected in the test. Similarly, the oral examination in the event of an unfavourable situation will be in writing form (questions in the form of a choice from several options or refilling). RECOMMENDED READING 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Deplazes P., Eckert J., Mathis A., von Samson-Himmelstjerna G., Zahner H.: PARASITOLOGY IN VETERINARY MEDICINE. Wageningen Academic Publishers, 2016, 653 s. ISBN:978-90- 8686-274-0. M. Taylor, B. Coop, R. L. Wall: VETERINARY PARASITOLOGY, 2007, Blackwell publishing Soulsby, E.J.L.: HELMINTHS, ARTHROPODS AND PROTOZOA OF DOMESTICATED ANIMALS. Bailliere Tindall, 1986. Urquart, G.M. et al.: VETERINARY PARASITOLOGY. Longman Scientific & Technical, 2000 Foreyt W.J.: VETERINARY PARASITOLOGY. Reference manual. Fifth Edition.Iowa State Press, 2001,235s.ISBN:0-8138-2419-2 Letková, Valéria. INTRODUCTION TO VETERINARY HELMINTHOLOGY - Diagnostic Manual. Rec. Monika Halánová. 1. vyd. Košice : UVLF, 2016. 216 s. ISBN 978-80-8077-488-2. Letková, V., Goldová, M., Csizsmárová, G.: HANDBOOK FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITES, 1996., Part I, Protozoology Letková, V., Goldová, M., Csizsmárová, G.: HANDBOOK FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITES, 1996., Part III, Arachnoenthomology SCHEME OF THE PRACTICAL LESSONS: VIII. SEMESTER (3 h) 1. TREMATODA – morphology and classification. The main morphological features of Digenea and their developmental stages. 2. CESTODA - morphology and classification. Cyclo- and Pseudophyllida, larval stages – metacestode. Morphological features of main families. 3. NEMATODA and ACANTHOCEPHALA – morphology and classification. The main morphological features of orders. 4. MICROSCOPY and MICROMETRY of helminths eggs, morphological features of eggs. 5. QUALITATIVE and QUANTITATIVE METHODS for intravital diagnosis of parasitic diseases. Flotation methods, McMaster methods. 6. SEDIMENTATION and LARVOSCOPIC METHODS. Diagnosis of lungworms. Faecal cultures methods. Differential dg. of L 1 of lung and L 3 of gut Strongyles. 7. LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS OF ENDOPARASITES IN RUMINANTS. List of endoparasites of ruminants and their diagnosis. Morphology of eggs and cysts. 8. LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS OF HORSES AND PIGS ENDOPARASITES. List of endoparasites of horses and pigs and their diagnosis. Morphology of eggs and cysts. 9. LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS OF ENDOPARASITES IN CARNIVORES. List of endoparasites in carnivores and their diagnosis. Morphology of eggs and cysts. 10. LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS OF POULTRY, RODENTS and RABBITS ENDOPARASITES. List of endoparasites in the above mentioned hosts and their diagnosis. Morphology of eggs and cysts. 11. DIAGNOSIS OF TRICHINELLOSIS. Collection of muscle samples. Microscopic examination, digestive methods according the EU legislation. Morphology of cysts and larvae of Trichinella spp. 12. TECHNIQUES FOR POST MORTEM DIAGNOSIS OF PARASITIC DISEASES. Techniques for helminthological necropsy in mammals and birds. 13. REPETITION, CONSULTATION and COMPENSATION. SCHEME OF THE LECTURES: VIII. SEMESTER (2 h) 1. INTRODUCTION TO HELMINTHOLOGY, characteristic, classification, DIGENEA (TREMATODA) – morphology, classification and life cycles. The main features of families. 2. FASCIOLOSIS, DICROCOELIOSIS, PARAMPHISTOMOSIS – morphology, location, prevalence, life cycles, epidemiology, pathogenesis and clinical signs, pathology, diagnosis, treatment and control. 3. OTHER TREMATODOSES of human and veterinary importance (genus Schistosoma, Paragonimus, Opistorchis, Metagonimis, Prostogonimus, etc.) – morphology, location, life cycles, prevalence, epidemiology, pathogenesis, pathology, diagnosis, methods of prevention and control. 4. CESTODA – morphology, classification and life cycles, (Cyclophyllida and Pseudophyllida), Diphylobothriosis, spirometrosis and sparganosis of human and carnivores – morphology, life cycle, epidemiology, pathogenesis and clinical signs, pathology, diagnosis, methods of treatment and control. TAPEWORM DISEASES OF RUMINANTS, HORSES, RABBITS (fam. Anoplocephalidae). 5. TAPEWORM DISEASES OF MAN (fam. Taeniidae, Hymenolepididae) – the main species, morphology, life cycles, prevalence, epidemiology, pathogenesis and clinical signs, pathology, diagnosis, treatment and control. Diseases caused by larval cestodes: cysticercosis and other metacestodoses: hydatidosis, alveococccosis, coenurosis, etc. 6. TAPEWORM DISEASES OF DOGS (fam. Taeniidae, Dipylidiidae, Mesocestoididae) – the main species, morphology, life cycles, prevalence, epidemiology, pathogenesis and clinical signs, pathology, diagnosis, treatment and control. 7. TAPEWORM DISEASES POULTRY AND RODENTS (fam. Hymenolepididae, Davaineidae, Dilepididae) – the main species according the hosts, morphology, life cycles, epidemiology, pathogenesis, pathology, diagnosis, treatment and control. 8. NEMATODA – morphology, classification and life cycles. The main features of orders. RHABDITIDA, OXYURIDA – oxyuratoses (horse, rabbit, human), morphology, life cycle, epidemiology, prevalence, pathogenesis and clinical signs, pathology, diagnosis, treatment and control. 9. ASCARIDA – ascaridoses, (horse, pig, cattle, carnivores, poultry), anisakidosis – the main species; morphology, life cycles, epidemiology, prevalence, pathogenesis and clinical signs, pathology, larva migrans (LMV, LMO), diagnosis, treatment, control. 10. STRONGYLIDA – lung strongylidoses (cattle, sheep, pig, horse, carnivores, rabbit, poultry) – the main species, morphology, life cycles, epidemiology, prevalence, pathogenesis and clinical signs, pathology, diagnosis, treatment and control. 11. STRONGYLIDA – GIT strongylidoses (ruminants, horses, pig, carnivores, poultry) – the main species according the hosts, morphology, life cycles, epidemiology, prevalence, pathogenesis and clinical signs, diagnosis, treatment and control. 12. ENOPLIDA (Trichurida), SPIRURIDA, FILARIDA, – characteristic, the main species, morphology, life cycles, epidemiology, prevalence, pathogenesis and clinical signs, pathology, diagnosis, treatment and control. 13. ACANTHOCEPHALA – morphology, classification and life cycles. Macracanthorhynchus, Polymorphus – morphology, life cycle, epidemiology, pathogenesis and clinical signs, pathology, diagnosis, treatment and control. QUESTIONS OF PARASITOLOGY (Every question inludes morphology, location, main species, geographical distribution, epizootology, epidemiology, the life cycle, pathogenesis and clinical signs, pathology, diagnosis, treatment and control of a parasite). PRACTICAL EXAM 1. Coprological examination of ruminants – flotation methods. 2. Coprological examination of ruminants – sedimentation methods. 3. Coprological examination of ruminants – larvoscopy. 4. Coprological examination of horses. 5. Coprological examination of pigs. 6. Coprological examination of carnivorous. 7. Coprological examination of poultry. 8. Coprological examination of rabbits and hares. 9. Coprological examination of rodents. 10. Diagnostic methods of sarcosystosis in IH. 11. Quantitative concentration methods. 12. Diagnostic methods of cryptosporidiosis. 13. Diagnostic methods of trichinellosis. 14. Diagnostic methods of ruminants blood parasites. 15. Diagnostic methods of carnivorous blood parasites. 1 1. 2. 2021 ORAL EXAM PROTOZOOLOGY Characteristic and classification of KINETOPLASTIDA Trypanosomoses, characteristic and classification (Stercoraria, Salivaria) Trypanosomoses of animals and humans Leishmaniosis (cutaneous, visceral, mucocutaneous) Giardiosis and spironucleosis Histomonosis Bovine and avian trichomonosis Pathogenic and potencial pathogenic AMOEBAE. Characteristic and classification of ALVEOLATA (APICOMPLEXA) Characteristic of monoxenous coccidia Eimeriosis of cattle Eimeriosis of sheep and goats Eimeriosis of rabbits and hares Chicken eimeriosis Eimeriosis and cystoisosporosis of pig Cystoisosporosis of carnivores Cryptosporidiosis of mammals and birds Characteristic of heteroxenous coccidia Heteroxenous coccidia of genus Toxoplasma Neosporosis Sarcocystosis of mammals, characteristic, life cycle. EPM, equine protozoal myeloencephalitis, Sarcocystis neurona Plasmodiidosis of human and animal Avian malaria (Plasmodium, Hemoproteus, Leucocytozoon) Babesiosis of cattle Dog babesiosis (Babesia, Hepatozoon) Theileriidosis of mammals Balantidiosis of pigs Microsporidia, encephalitozoonosis ARACHNOENTOMOLOGY General morphology and classification of ARTHROPODA Veterinary and medical significance of arthropods as vectors of pathogenes General morphology and life cycle of INSECTA Parasitic Nematocera ( midges, blackflies, sandflies, mosquitoes) Parasitic Brachycera (horse flies) Parasitic Cyclorrhapha (house & stable flies, blowflies, forest flies & keds) Hypodermosis of cattle Oestrosis of sheep Gasterophilosis in horses Myiasis Melophagosis (sheep) Lice of mammals - Anoplura Biting lice of mammals – Ischnocera Biting lice of birds - Amblycera Fleas of mammals and birds General morphology and classification of ACARI Hard Ticks - morphology, life cycle, significance Soft Ticks (Argasid ticks) – the most important species Mites – morphology, life cycle, significance Sarcoptosis and notoedrosis of mammals Cnemidocoptosis and cytoditosis Demodectic mange of animals Psoroptosis of animals Chorioptosis of animals Otodectosis and cheletiellosis of carnivores Dermanyssidosis Trombiculosis Regnum: EUKARYOTA Subregnum: METAZOA (Animalia) HELMINTHOLOGY TREMATODA - morphology, classification and life cycle Fasciolosis of mammals ( family Fasciolidae: Fasciola, Fascioloides, Fasciolopsis) Dicrocoeliosis of ruminants (Family Dicrocoelidae: Dicrocoelium, Eurytrema, Platynosomum) Prosthogonimosis and other trematodosis of poultry Paramphistomatidosis of ruminants Opistorchiida (Opistorchis, Clonorchis, Metagonimus, Heterophyes) Schistosomosis of mammals Other trematodoses of veterinary importance (genus Metagonimus, Paragonimus, Heterophyes, Alaria, Troglotrema) Morphology and classification of CYCLOPHYLLIDA Life cycle and description of larval stages of Cyclophyllida Taenia saginata and bovine cysticercosis Taenia solium and swine cysticercosis Coenurosis of animals Cysticercosis of the herbivores and omnivores Echinococcosis (hydatidosis) Alveococcosis (Echinococcus multilocularis) Cestodoses of dogs, cats, and other carnivorous animals Cestodoses of horses Cestodoses of ruminants Cestodoses of poultry Cestodoses of man and rodents Morphology, classification and life cycle of PSEUDOPHYLLIDA Diphyllobothriosis, sparganosis and ligulosis Morphology, classification and life cycles of NEMATODA Order ASCARIDA, Ascaris: Swine ascariosis Parascaris : Equine parascariosis Toxocara, Toxascaris: carnivorous toxocarosis; LMV, LMO (human toxocarosis) Calf toxocarosis Ascaridiosis and heterakidosis of birds Anisakidosis Order OXYURIDA, Oxyuris: oxyurosis of horses Other oxyuroids of mammals (Passalurus, Skrjabinema, Enterobius, Aspiculuris, Syphacia) Order RHABDITIDA, Strongyloides: Strongyloidosis of mammals Order STRONGYLIDA, Equine strongylosis Parasitosis of large intestine of ruminants and pigs (Chabertia, Oesophagostomum) Amidostomosis and trichostrongylosis of poultry Stephanurosis of pigs Ancylostomatidosis of carnivores (LMC) Ancylostomatidosis of ruminants GIT trichostrongylosis of ruminants, rabbits and hares (Trichostrongylus, Nematodirus, Marshalagia, Hemonchus) Bovine, and ovine ostertagiosis Lung strongylidosis of cattle ( Dictyocaulus) Lung strongylidosis of small ruminants (Dictyocaulus, Protostrongylus, Muellerius, Cystyocaulus, Bicaulus) Lung strongylidosis of pigs (Metastrongylus) Lung strongylidosis of carnivorous animals (Filaroides, Aelulostrongylus, Angiostrongylus) Order SPIRURIDA: Spirocerca : Spirocercosis of dogs Thelasiosis of ruminats Other spiruroids: Tetrameres, Habronema, Draschia, Gnathostoma, Gongylonema. Order FILARIDA, Dirofilaria: Dirofilariosis of dog and cats Bovine and equine onchocercosis (Onchocerca, Parafilaria, Stephanofilaria, Setaria) Filariosis of man (Onchocerca, Brugia, Wuchereria, Loa, Dracunculus) Order Enoplida: Trichinella: Trichinellosis Trichuris and Capillaria, trichurosis and capillariosis of animals Morphology, classification, and life cycle of ACANTHOCEPHALA Polymorphosis and filicollosis of aquatic birds Macracanthorhynchosis of pigs HELMINTHOLOGY Helminth: parasitic worm Platyhelminthes (flukes, tapeworms) Nemathelminthes (Nematodes/roundworms/threadworms) Acanthocephala (thorny-headed or spiny-headed worms) PARASITIC WORMS HELMINTHS Pathogenic helminths are some of most common parasites Worldwide distribution Species specificity  Exceptions  Zoonotic species Subregnum METAZOA (Animalia)/HELMINTHS Phylum PLATYHELMINTHES NEMATHELMINTHES Subphylum TREMATODA CERCOMEROMORPHA Class Aspidogastrea Monogenea Cestoda Gyrodactylida Pseudophyllida Amphistomida Dactylogyrida Cyclophyllida Plagiorchiida Polyopisthocotylida ACANTHOCEPHALA Digenea Order Echinostomida HELMINTHS by nutrition: Stenophagous (monophagous) = live on one host species, narrow host range (Taenia saginata) Euryphagic (polyphagous) = live on several host species, a wide range of hosts (Trichinella spiralis) Opistorchiida Strigeatida 2 1. 2. 2021 Prepatent period: The time interval from the ingest of the parasite to the emergence of the propagative stages of the parasite (cysts, oocysts, eggs, larvae) from the host organism. It is species-specific. Incubation time: The time from the infestation of the parasite (pathogen) into the host to the appearance of the initial clinical signs of the disease. Patent Period: Is the time interval indicating an active infection. By this is meant the time during which the parasite is clinically detectable in the host. Nomenclature !!! Disease – „parasitosis“ (-osis; e.g. trichinellosis) „Pathogen“, which causes parasitosis = PARASITE (e.g. Trichinella spiralis) It can also mean the life span of a parasite in a host or the time during which the parasite is capable of producing eggs, larvae, cysts or oocysts. General characteristics of phylum PLATYHELMINTHES  cca 20.000 species  Also "flat worms"  They live in marine, freshwater conditions and also on land  Dimensions: from mm to more than 20 m  Body bilaterally symmetrical  Dorzoventrally flattened  Called: Acoelomate body cavity is missing  Triploblastic - 3 different germinal leaves  Diffusion breathing  Digestive system incomplete  Excretory system - protonephridial type with so-called flame cells  The first known so-called. Cephalization - cranial nerve ganglion  Most hermaphrodites (exception - family Schistosomatidae)  Life cycle: indirect, via intermediate hosts (biohelmints) Phylum PLATYHELMINTHES Subphylum TREMATODA CERCOMEROMORPHA Class Aspidogastrea Monogenea Digenea Flukes Class: Monogenea  About 1.100 species  Ectoparasites on the skin or gills of fish, amphibians, reptiles, cetaceans or cephalopods;  The life-cycle is direct, with a single host.  They are attached to the host's surface by a characteristic opisthaptor which is species-specific and provided with hooks and hooklets.  Genera: Gyrodactylus Dactylogyrus Diplozoon Prohaptor Mouth Digestive tract cecum Ovary Testis Opisthaptor 3 1. 2. 2021 Monogeneans have a direct life cycle in a single host. Class: Digenea Class: DIGENEA Order  About 11.000 species. ECHINOSTOMIDA  All have complex life cycles, involving one or more intermediate hosts, the first of which is always a mollusc, which is usually aquatic. AMPHISTOMIDA  As adults they found in most vertebrates groups, including fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals, acting as final (definitive) hosts, where they may give rise to highly pathogenic infections. PLAGIORCHIIDA  They may be located in most of the internal organs (lungs, bladder and blood stream).  Although the majority are found in the gastrointestinal tract, or closely associated organs such as the bile duct and liver. OPISTHORCHIIDA Family Fasciola, Fascioloides, Fasciolopsis, Echinostomatidae Echinostoma, Euparyphium, Echinoparyphium, Hypoderaeum, Philophtalmus, ... Paramphistomidae Paramphistomum, Calicophoron, Cotylophoron, Gigantocotyle, Orthocoelium Gastrodiscidae Gastrodiscus, Gastrodiscoides, Homalogaster Gastrothylacidae Gastrothylax, Carmyerius, Fischoederius Dicrocoelidae Dicrocoelium, Eurytrema, Platynosomum Prosthogonimidae Prosthogonimus Troglotrematidae Collyriclum, Troglotrema, Nanophyetus Paragonimidae Paragonimus Heterophyidae Opistorchiidae Heterophyes, Metagonimus, Apophallus Opisthorchis (syn. Clonorchis), Metorchis Schistosomatidae STRIGEIDIDA Strigeidae Diplostomidae Morphology Genus Fasciolidae Schistosoma, Bilharziella, Trichobilharzia, Orientobilharzia, Ornithobilharzia, Heterobilharzia, Austrobilharzia Apatemon, Cotylurus, Parastrigea, Strigea Diplostomum, Alaria Significant suckers, usually oral and abdominal (acetabulum) suckers, which have a predominantly fixative function, are noticeable on the body surface. 4 1. 2. 2021 The Adult Digenean Fluke The basic body form of the adult trematode takes a number of different forms: AMPHISTOME (Gastrodiscoides hominis) DISTOME (Fasciola hepatica) Morphology DIGENEA - systems ECHINOSTOME (Echinostoma sp.) MONOSTOME SCHISTOSOME (Notocotylus attenuatus ) Blue: digestive system Yellow: excretory system Green: male genital system Red: female genital system Black: viteline glands 1- oral sucker 2- ventral sucker (acetabulum) 3- pharynx 4- esophagus 5- intestine 6- small excretory tubule 7- collecting tube 8- excretory bladder 9- excretory pore 10- testis 11- vas efferens 12- vas deferens 13- seminal vesicle 14- prostate gland 15- cirrus 16- cirrus sac 17- genital pore 18- ovary 19- seminal receptacle 20- Laurer`s canal 21- ootype 22- Mehlis` gland 23 uterus 24- vitelline gland 25- common vitelline duct Elongate trematodes, with separate sexes, the male generally larger, holding the female within a groove formed by a folding of the male body (the gynaecophoric canal). Found within the circulatory system. (e.g. Schistosoma nansoni ) DIGENEA – body surface DIGENEA – reproductive system  Hermaphrodits  Nervous system  MALE REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS:  Excretory system  The circulatory and respiratory systems 5 1. 2. 2021 Morphology Female reproductive organs: Digenea Life Cycle  Complex life cycles with at least two hosts and several life cycle stages  First Intermediate host is almost always a snail.  Some have another aquatic animal as a second intermediate host. Digenea Life Cycle – Egg - The flukes are oviparous and release (no embryonated) eggs into the external environment. Most digenea eggs have an operculum Except Schistosoma thorn  Final host is usually eats the second intermediate host with infection stages.  One exception - Schistosoma spp. Developing embryo (miracidium) Already fertilized and ready to hatch into new organism DIGENEA – life cycle I. EMBRYOGONY apical stilet Egg with operculum, embyonal and yolk cells. Morula in an egg. A mature egg with miracidium. Miracidium leaves the egg. bases of embryos - from them they form → sporocysts in IH 6 1. 2. 2021 II. Parthenogony Sporocyst Redia When miracidium finds a snail, it penetrates its mantle and turns into a sporocyst “Sac” of embryos; it releases embryos into the snail Embryos can become sporocyst, redia, or cercaria Similar to a sporocyst but has a pharynx and small digestive system More mobile than sporocyst Makes embryos which can turn into cercaria Cercaria Leaves the snail to find next host or to form metacercaria cercaria furcocercaria Looks like a miniature adult with a tail Tail for swimming Loses tail Transform into metacercaria Or it penetrates next host Schistosoma cercaria (furcocercaria) have forked-tails III. CYSTOGONY 1. Cercariae penetrate directly; 2. Cercariae are encysted in the external environment; 3. Cercariae penetrate directly into the second intermediate host; 4. Cercariae are transformed into mezocercaria and metacercaria are created in the third intermediate host. Life cycle of digenea Cercariae are shed from the snail at rain events and encyst to become metacercariae on vegetation (infective form for FH); FH – infection by ingestion contaminated grass or hay; young flukes penetrate the small intestinal wall, migrate through peritoneal cavity, liver capsule to bile ducts; ... IV. MARITOGONY 7 1. 2. 2021 Class: DIGENEA Digene Life Cycle Egg Adult Miracidium Order Sporocyst Family ECHINOSTOMIDA Metacercaria AMPHISTOMIDA Daughter sporocyst PLAGIORCHIIDA Redia Cercaria OPISTHORCHIIDA Daughter Redia Genus Fasciolidae Fasciola, Fascioloides, Fasciolopsis, Echinostomatidae Echinostoma, Euparyphium, Echinoparyphium, Hypoderaeum, Philophtalmus, ... Paramphistomidae Paramphistomum, Calicophoron, Cotylophoron, Gigantocotyle, Orthocoelium Gastrodiscidae Gastrodiscus, Gastrodiscoides, Homalogaster Gastrothylacidae Gastrothylax, Carmyerius, Fischoederius Dicrocoelidae Dicrocoelium, Eurytrema, Platynosomum Prosthogonimidae Prosthogonimus Troglotrematidae Collyriclum, Troglotrema, Nanophyetus Paragonimidae Paragonimus Heterophyidae Opistorchiidae Heterophyes, Metagonimus, Apophallus Opisthorchis (syn. Clonorchis), Metorchis Schistosoma, Bilharziella, Trichobilharzia, Orientobilharzia, Ornithobilharzia, Heterobilharzia, Austrobilharzia Apatemon, Cotylurus, Parastrigea, Strigea Diplostomum, Alaria Schistosomatidae STRIGEIDIDA Strigeidae Diplostomidae Family: FASCIOLIDAE Fasciola, Fascioloides, Fasciolopsis, Parafasciolopsis Order: ECHINOSTOMIDA Family: FASCIOLIDAE – Fasciola, Fascioloides, Fasciolopsis, Parafasciolopsis ECHINOSTOMATIDAE – Echinoparyphium, Echinostoma, Hypoderaeum, Isthmiophora  Zoonotic Species IH FH Location Fasciola hepatica (18-50x7-14 mm) Galba truncatula (syn. Lymnea) (Lymnaeidae) Large Ru, Ov, Cap, Eq, Sus, buffalo, wild ruminants, man bile ducts, bladder; Fasciola gigantica (24-75x5-12 mm) Radix (Lymnaea) Large Ru, buffalo, Ov, Cap, Eq, donkey, camel, man Bile ducts Fascioloides magna (70-100x20-30 mm) Galba truncatula, Lymnea modicella, .... Wapiti, deer, fallow deer, Large Ru, Ov, Cap Liver parenchyma Parafasciolopsis fasciolaemorpha (3-7x1-2,5 mm) Planorbarius corneus Moose, roe deer, fallow deer, bison, Ov Fasciolopsis buski (30-75x8-20 mm) Segmentina spp. Hippeutis spp. Sus, man Juvenile - abdominal cavity, liver parenchyma ; Small intestine, gall bladder, bile ducts Small intestine Life cycle FASCIOLA HEPATICA/FASCIOLOSIS They develop in the liver 6-8 weeks. Then they migrate to the bile ducts and the bladder. Embryogony lasts on average 56 days Prepatent period: 10-12 weeks Metacercaria will create a shells in 2-3 days. Parthenogony lasts 6-7 weeks (optimal conditions) (18-50x7-14 mm) 8 1. 2. 2021 Developmental stages of Fasciola hepatica Fasciolosis: liver fluke disease Distribution: worldwide, in grazing animals; Endemic in temperate regions around the world and US including the west coast, gulf coast, and rocky mountain region; Veterinary significance: may be very high; The most important trematode in domestic ruminants; egg miracidium sporocyst Public health significance: low, zoonosis - about 2.4 million humans worldwide are infected; Human infections usually come from ingestion of metacercariae in water or on water cress; redia cercaria metacercaria Epidemiology Fasciolosis: liver fluke disease Caused by: Fasciola hepatica, common liver fluke, prevalent in temperate areas, tropics, subtropics; 2-3 cm, bile ducts (gall bladder), occasionally other organs, such as lung, etc. Fasciola gigantica, large liver fluke, prevalent in tropical and subtropical region of Africa, Middle East, South-East Asia, China, India etc. Host spectrum: wide, most herbivorous mammals and humans Life cycle: indirect Intermediate hosts: For F. hepatica: freshwater snails of the genus Lymnea. Lymnea truncatula in Europe, highlands of Africa Lymnea tomentosa and L. columella in Australia, New Zealand For F. gigantica: L. auricularia Infection: per os Prepatent period: 6 - 12 weeks Endemic distribution Requirements: egg-laying hosts, wet environment, suitable snail species Factor of stability: longevity of infection, chronic egg production of adult fluke (20 000 eggs or more fluke/day) Factors of instability: availability of moisture, temperature (for development of fluke larvae and snails a mean temp. of at least 10 °C is needed. Metacercariae (MC) survive best on grass and hay at temperature below 20 °C, but die rapidly at higher temperature and desiccation. High intake of MC often occurs by forced grazing of wet areas during drought. PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Adverse effects: Mechanical Toxic Loss of blood  These worms is their reliance on a family of developmentally-regulated papain-like cysteine peptidases, termed cathepsins.  These proteolytic enzymes play central roles in virulence, infection, tissue migration and modulation of host innate and adaptive immune responses. Transmission: Ingestion of metacercaria. Location in Final host: Liver (juvenile form), bile ducts, bladder. 9 1. 2. 2021 SUBACUTE FORM OF FASCIOLOSIS ACUTE FORM OF FASCIOLOSIS  sheep (on single ingestion > 2000 metacercariae per sheep)  after 2-6 weeks - migration of juvenile fasciols in liver parenchyma = „hepatitis traumatica“, rupture of blood vessels, bleeding in abdominal cavity;  when ingesting 500-1500 metacercariae over a longer period;  flukes in the bile ducts = inflammation (moderate cholangitis) + migration of juveniles in the parenchyma of the liver; CHRONIC FORM OF FASCIOLOSIS  end of winter, spring - 4-5 months after metacercariae (200-500); Clinical signs Immunity specific antibodies are detectable in the serum from the third week p.i. by ELISA, IHA There is no evidence of acquired resistance in sheep and cattle, but infected cattle can spontaneously recover Submandibular edema Sheep - do not gain resistance to re-infection; Cattle - a certain degree of resistance to re-infection; anaemia emaciation Pathology Pathology Subacute form with hemorrhagies and fibrosis Migration of juvenile forms in sheep liver Acute fasciolosis, massive hemorrhagies Subacute form 10 1. 2. 2021 Pathology Diagnosis In vivo Clinical signs Coprologic methods (ovoscopy) – sedimentation methods Serologic – ELISA , IHA Acute form – elevation of GLDH-glutamat dehydrogenase Chronic form - GGT gama glutamyl transferase Post – mortem Migration of young form in liver Adult flukes in bile duct Treatment Pathology, adult forms in liver and bile duct Fasciola gigantica/tropical fasciolosis Acute disease: stop grazing, keep affected flock indoors or move immediately to fluke – free pasture; treat with the flukicide which shows 90 – 100% efficacy against immature and mature F. hepatica (diamfenetid (Coryphamin), triclabendazol (Fasinex), rafoxanid (Rafendazol); Oxyclozanid; Closantel; Subacute and chronic disease: use any flukicidal compound, preferably those effective against flukes aged 6 weeks or older (nitroxynil, closantel, rafoxanid, triclabendazole, e.t.c.); Control  Treatment of the infected hosts  Reduction of snail habitats  Other measures 190x100 µm Pathology Fasioloides magna Liver fibrosis, cholangitis F. gigantica Chronic fasciolosis 11 1. 2. 2021  Fascioloides magna  liver parenchyma - typical pseudocysts Orig. foto: Kočišová, 2012 Pathology In deer and cattle flukes tend to be encapsulated in the liver by host reaction and are less pathogenic In sheep and goats worms may migrate constantly in the liver tissue causing traumatic hepatitis which may be fatal; vascular lesions are endophlebitis and trombosis; affected sheep usually die within 6 month Orig. foto: Kočišová, 2012 Fasciolopsis buski Fasciolopsis buski  Definitve Hosts: Humans and Pigs  Intermediate Hosts: Aquatic snails, particularly Segmentina and Hippeutis.  Geographic Distribution: Orient.  About 210,000 people are infected.  Source of infection: Aquatic vegetation, including water chestnuts, water, lotus, and bamboo.  Transmission to F.H.: Ingestion of metacercaria on vegetation.  Location in F.H.: Small Intestines 12 1. 2. 2021 FASCIOLOPSIS BUSKI / Fasciolopiasis Is prevalent in Southeast Asia and lives in humans and pigs’ intestines, so it is also called Asia Giant Intestinal Fluke. The prevalence of fasciolopiasis is related to growing water plants and feeding pigs on water plants. ECHINOSTOMATIDAE – Echinoparyphium, Echinostoma, Hypoderaeum, Isthmiophora  Intestine of birds and mammals;  HELMINTOZOONOSIS  Small suction sucker + head collar with thorns  IH: fresh-water snail  Life cycle: 1 IH (snail) or 2 IH (snails, aquatic animals)  A men is infected with metacercaria;  The flukes will adhere to the duodenal and jejunal mucosa of the intestine, they will grow to adult flukes in about 90 days;  Death due to circulatory failure due to intoxication! Pathology - Generally very little. May obstruct small intestines and interfere with food absorption. Absorption of worm waste results in verminous intoxication similar to tapeworms.  Diagnosis: finding of eggs in stool; ELISA;  Therapy: praziquantel (Biltricide); befenium (Alcopar); albendazole, mebendazole, levamizol, tiabendazol;  Prevention: heat treatment of plants; Echinostoma llocanum Species IH FH Location Water snail Lymneidae; Water snail Planorbidae duck, goose, pigeon, chicken, turkey Ileum, cecum, rectum I. II. snail Lymneidae; snail, frog duck, geese, waterfowl, rarely chickens, pigeon I. II. snail Lymneidae; Snail, frog, leech duck, goose, waterfowl, chicken, pigeon I. II. snail Lymneidae; frog, fish weasel, fox, hedgehog, cat, pig, ... I. Echinostoma revolutum 6,5-30x0,6-1,6 mm II. Echinoparyphium recurvatum 1,5-4,5x0,7 mm Hypoderaeum conoideum 12x2 mm Isthmiophora melis 2,4-11x0,7-1,6 mm small intestine small intestine small intestine Echinostoma revolutum Phtilophtalmidae :  eye of birds  development over 1 IH  Philophthalmus posaviniensis  Ph. gralli  Ph. anatinus  Ph. lacrymosus  attached to the third eyelash - thickening, hyperemia, erosion, corneal opacity, blindness;  increased tear;  dried secretions in the corner of the eye;  niklozamid, rafoxamid, oxyclozanid, praziquantel 13 1. 2. 2021 Philophthalmus lachrymosus Philophthalmus gralli 14 